 16                                                                                           BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 2
                            BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
2.1 Kingdom Monera     Since the dawn of civilisation, there have been many attempts to classify
                       living organisms. It was done instinctively not using criteria that were
2.2 Kingdom Protista
                       scientific but borne out of a need to use organisms for our own use – for
2.3 Kingdom Fungi      food, shelter and clothing. Aristotle was the earliest to attempt a more
2.4 Kingdom Plantae    scientific basis for classification. He used simple morphological characters
                       to classify plants into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animals
2.5 Kingdom            into two groups, those which had red blood and those that did not.
    Animalia               In Linnaeus' time a Two Kingdom system of classification with
2.6 Viruses, Viroids   Plantae and Animalia kingdoms was developed that included all plants
    and Lichens        and animals respectively. This system was used till very recently. This
                       system did not distinguish between the eukaryotes and prokaryotes,
                       unicellular and multicellular organisms and photosynthetic (green algae)
                       and non-photosynthetic (fungi) organisms. Classification of organisms
                       into plants and animals was easily done and was easy to understand,
                       but, a large number of organisms did not fall into either category. Hence
                       the two kingdom classification used for a long time was found inadequate.
                       A need was also felt for including, besides gross morphology, other
                       characteristics like cell structure, nature of wall, mode of nutrition, habitat,
                       methods of reproduction, evolutionary relationships, etc. Classification
                       systems for the living organisms have hence, undergone several changes
                       over time. Though plant and animal kingdoms have been a constant
                       under all different systems, the understanding of what groups/organisms
                       be included under these kingdoms have been changing; the number and
                       nature of other kingdoms have also been understood differently by
                       different scientists over time.
    BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                                  17


                       TABLE 2.1 Characteristics of the Five Kingdoms

                                                     Five Kingdoms
 Characters
                  Monera             Protista        Fungi             Plantae       Animalia
 Cell type        Prokaryotic        Eukaryotic      Eukaryotic        Eukaryotic    Eukaryotic

 Cell wall        Noncellulosic   Present       in   Present           Present
                  (Polysaccharide some               (without          (cellulose)   Absent
                  + amino acid)                      cellulose)

 Nuclear          Absent             Present         Present           Present       Present
 membrane
 Body             Cellular           Cellular        Multiceullar/     Tissue/       Tissue/organ/
 organisation                                        loose tissue      organ         organ system
                  Autotrophic
                                     Autotrophic     Heterotrophic     Autotrophic Heterotrophic
                  (chemosyn-
                  thetic and         (Photosyn-      (Saprophytic/     (Photosyn- ( H o l o z o i c /
 Mode of                             thetic) and     Parasitic)        thetic)     Saprophytic
                  photosynthetic)
 nutrition        and Hetero-        Hetero-                                       etc.)
                  trophic (sapro-    trophic
                  phytic/para-
                  sitic)



    R.H. Whittaker (1969) proposed a Five Kingdom Classification.
The kingdoms defined by him were named Monera, Protista, Fungi,
Plantae and Animalia. The main criteria for classification used by him
include cell structure, thallus organisation, mode of nutrition,
reproduction and phylogenetic relationships. Table 2.1 gives a
comparative account of different characteristics of the five kingdoms.
    Let us look at this five kingdom classification to understand the issues
and considerations that influenced the classification system. Earlier
classification systems included bacteria, blue green algae, fungi, mosses,
ferns, gymnosperms and the angiosperms under ‘Plants’. The character
that unified this whole kingdom was that all the organisms included had
a cell wall in their cells. This placed together groups which widely differed
in other characteristics. It brought together the prokaryotic bacteria and
the blue green algae with other groups which were eukaryotic. It also
grouped together the unicellular organisms and the multicellular ones,
say, for example, Chlamydomonas and Spirogyra were placed together
under algae. The classification did not differentiate between the
heterotrophic group – fungi, and the autotrophic green plants, though
they also showed a characteristic difference in their walls composition –
the fungi had chitin in their walls while the green plants had a cellulosic
18                                                                             BIOLOGY


        cell wall. When such characteristics were considered, the fungi were placed
        in a separate kingdom – Kingdom Fungi. All prokaryotic organisms were
        grouped together under Kingdom Monera and the unicellular eukaryotic
        organisms were placed in Kingdom Protista. Kingdom Protista has
        brought together Chlamydomonas, Chlorella (earlier placed in Algae
        within Plants and both having cell walls) with Paramoecium and Amoeba
        (which were earlier placed in the animal kingdom which lack cell wall). It
        has put together organisms which, in earlier classifications, were placed
        in different kingdoms. This happened because the criteria for classification
        changed. This kind of changes will take place in future too depending on
        the improvement in our understanding of characteristics and evolutionary
        relationships. Over time, an attempt has been made to evolve a
        classification system which reflects not only the morphological,
        physiological and reproductive similarities, but is also phylogenetic, i.e.,
        is based on evolutionary relationships.
             In this chapter we will study characteristics of Kingdoms Monera,
        Protista and Fungi of the Whittaker system of classification. The Kingdoms
        Plantae and Animalia, commonly referred to as plant and animal
        kingdoms, respectively, will be dealt with separately in chapters 3 and 4.


        2.1        KINGDOM MONERA
        Bacteria are the sole members of the Kingdom Monera. They are the most
        abundant micro-organisms. Bacteria occur almost everywhere. Hundreds
        of bacteria are present in a handful of soil. They also live in extreme habitats
        such as hot springs, deserts, snow and deep oceans where very few other
        life forms can survive. Many of them live in or on other organisms as
        parasites.
             Bacteria are grouped under four categories based on their shape: the
        spherical Coccus (pl.: cocci), the rod-shaped Bacillus (pl.: bacilli), the
        comma-shaped Vibrium (pl.: vibrio) and the spiral Spirillum (pl.: spirilla)
        (Figure 2.1).



                       Spore                               Flagellum




Cocci                                 Spirilla
         Bacilli
                                                                            Vibrio

               Figure 2.1 Bacteria of different shapes
     BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                              19


    Though the bacterial structure is very simple, they are very complex
in behaviour. Compared to many other organisms, bacteria as a group
show the most extensive metabolic diversity. Some of the bacteria are
autotrophic, i.e., they synthesise their own food from inorganic substrates.
They may be photosynthetic autotrophic or chemosynthetic autotrophic.
The vast majority of bacteria are heterotrophs, i.e., they do not synthesise
their own food but depend on other organisms or on dead organic matter
for food.

2.1.1 Archaebacteria
These bacteria are special since they live in some of the most harsh habitats
such as extreme salty areas (halophiles), hot springs (thermoacidophiles)
and marshy areas (methanogens). Archaebacteria differ from other bacteria
in having a different cell wall structure and this feature is responsible for
their survival in extreme conditions. Methanogens are present in the gut
of several ruminant animals such as cows and buffaloes and they are
responsible for the production of methane (biogas) from the dung of these
animals.

2.1.2 Eubacteria
There are thousands of different eubacteria or ‘true
bacteria’. They are characterised by the presence of a
rigid cell wall, and if motile, a flagellum. The
cyanobacteria (also referred to as blue-green algae)
have chlorophyll a similar to green plants and are
photosynthetic autotrophs (Figure 2.2). The
cyanobacteria are unicellular, colonial or filamentous,
freshwater/marine or terrestrial algae. The colonies
are generally surrounded by gelatinous sheath. They
often form blooms in polluted water bodies. Some of
these organisms can fix atmospheric nitrogen in
specialised cells called heterocysts, e.g., Nostoc and
Anabaena. Chemosynthetic autotrophic bacteria
oxidise various inorganic substances such as
nitrates, nitrites and ammonia and use the released
energy for their ATP production. They play a great role
in recycling nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorous,
iron and sulphur.
    Heterotrophic bacteria are the most abundant
in nature. The majority are important decomposers.
Many of them have a significant impact on human
                                                          Figure 2.2 A filamentous blue-green
affairs. They are helpful in making curd from milk,                  algae – Nostoc
production of antibiotics, fixing nitrogen in legume
20                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                                            roots, etc. Some are pathogens causing damage
                                            to human beings, crops, farm animals and pets.
                                            Cholera, typhoid, tetanus, citrus canker are well
                                            known diseases caused by different bacteria.
                                                Bacteria reproduce mainly by fission (Figure
                                            2.3). Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions,
                                            they produce spores. They also reproduce by a
                                            sort of sexual reproduction by adopting a
                                            primitive type of DNA transfer from one bacterium
                                            to the other.
     Figure 2.3 A dividing bacterium            The Mycoplasma are organisms that
                                            completely lack a cell wall. They are the smallest
                     living cells known and can survive without oxygen. Many mycoplasma
                     are pathogenic in animals and plants.


                     2.2 KINGDOM PROTISTA

                     All single-celled eukaryotes are placed under Protista, but the boundaries
                     of this kingdom are not well defined. What may be ‘a photosynthetic
                     protistan’ to one biologist may be ‘a plant’ to another. In this book we
                     include Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime moulds and
                     Protozoans under Protista. Members of Protista are primarily aquatic.
                     This kingdom forms a link with the others dealing with plants, animals
                     and fungi. Being eukaryotes, the protistan cell body contains a well defined
                     nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles. Some have flagella or
                     cilia. Protists reproduce asexually and sexually by a process involving
                     cell fusion and zygote formation.

                     2.2.1 Chrysophytes
                     This group includes diatoms and golden algae (desmids). They are found
                     in fresh water as well as in marine environments. They are microscopic
                     and float passively in water currents (plankton). Most of them are
                     photosynthetic. In diatoms the cell walls form two thin overlapping shells,
                     which fit together as in a soap box. The walls are embedded with silica
                     and thus the walls are indestructible. Thus, diatoms have left behind
                     large amount of cell wall deposits in their habitat; this accumulation over
                     billions of years is referred to as ‘diatomaceous earth’. Being gritty this
                     soil is used in polishing, filtration of oils and syrups. Diatoms are the
                     chief ‘producers’ in the oceans.
     BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                              21


2.2.2 Dinoflagellates
These organisms are mostly marine and photosynthetic.
They appear yellow, green, brown, blue or red depending
on the main pigments present in their cells. The cell wall
has stiff cellulose plates on the outer surface. Most of
them have two flagella; one lies longitudinally and the
other transversely in a furrow between the wall plates.
Very often, red dinoflagellates (Example: Gonyaulax)
undergo such rapid multiplication that they make the
sea appear red (red tides). Toxins released by such large
numbers may even kill other marine animals such as
fishes.

2.2.3 Euglenoids
Majority of them are fresh water organisms found in
stagnant water. Instead of a cell wall, they have a protein
rich layer called pellicle which makes their body flexible.
They have two flagella, a short and a long one. Though
they are photosynthetic in the presence of sunlight, when                    (a)
deprived of sunlight they behave like heterotrophs by
predating on other smaller organisms. Interestingly, the
pigments of euglenoids are identical to those present in
higher plants. Example: Euglena (Figure 2.4a).

2.2.4 Slime Moulds
Slime moulds are saprophytic protists. The body moves
along decaying twigs and leaves engulfing organic
material. Under suitable conditions, they form an
aggregation called plasmodium which may grow and                            (b)
spread over several feet. During unfavourable conditions,
the plasmodium differentiates and forms fruiting bodies        Figure 2.4 (a) Euglena
bearing spores at their tips. The spores possess true walls.              (b) Paramoecium
They are extremely resistant and survive for many years,
even under adverse conditions. The spores are dispersed
by air currents.

2.2.5 Protozoans
All protozoans are heterotrophs and live as predators or
parasites. They are believed to be primitive relatives of
animals. There are four major groups of protozoans.
Amoeboid protozoans: These organisms live in fresh
water, sea water or moist soil. They move and capture
22                                                                        BIOLOGY


     their prey by putting out pseudopodia (false feet) as in Amoeba. Marine
     forms have silica shells on their surface. Some of them such as Entamoeba
     are parasites.
     Flagellated protozoans: The members of this group are either free-living
     or parasitic. They have flagella. The parasitic forms cause diaseases such
     as sleeping sickness. Example: Trypanosoma.
     Ciliated protozoans: These are aquatic, actively moving organisms because
     of the presence of thousands of cilia. They have a cavity (gullet) that opens
     to the outside of the cell surface. The coordinated movement of rows of
     cilia causes the water laden with food to be steered into the gullet. Example:
     Paramoecium (Figure 2.4b).
     Sporozoans: This includes diverse organisms that have an infectious
     spore-like stage in their life cycle. The most notorious is Plasmodium
     (malarial parasite) which causes malaria, a disease which has a staggering
     effect on human population.


     2.3    KINGDOM FUNGI
     The fungi constitute a unique kingdom of heterotrophic organisms. They
     show a great diversity in morphology and habitat. When your bread
     develops a mould or your orange rots it is because of fungi. The common
     mushroom you eat and toadstools are also fungi. White spots seen on
     mustard leaves are due to a parasitic fungus. Some unicellular fungi,
     e.g., yeast are used to make bread and beer. Other fungi cause diseases
     in plants and animals; wheat rust-causing Puccinia is an important
     example. Some are the source of antibiotics, e.g., Penicillium. Fungi are
     cosmopolitan and occur in air, water, soil and on animals and plants.
     They prefer to grow in warm and humid places. Have you ever wondered
     why we keep food in the refrigerator ? Yes, it is to prevent food from going
     bad due to bacterial or fungal infections.
         With the exception of yeasts which are unicellular, fungi are
     filamentous. Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structures
     called hyphae. The network of hyphae is known as mycelium. Some hyphae
     are continuous tubes filled with multinucleated cytoplasm – these are
     called coenocytic hyphae. Others have septae or cross walls in their
     hyphae. The cell walls of fungi are composed of chitin and polysaccharides.
         Most fungi are heterotrophic and absorb soluble organic matter from
     dead substrates and hence are called saprophytes. Those that depend
     on living plants and animals are called parasites. They can also live as
     symbionts – in association with algae as lichens and with roots of higher
     plants as mycorrhiza.
         Reproduction in fungi can take place by vegetative means –
     fragmentation, fission and budding. Asexual reproduction is by spores
       BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                           23


called conidia or sporangiospores or zoospores, and sexual reproduction
is by oospores, ascospores and basidiospores. The various spores are
produced in distinct structures called fruiting bodies. The sexual cycle
involves the following three steps:
(i)    Fusion of protoplasms between two motile or non-motile gametes
       called plasmogamy.
(ii)   Fusion of two nuclei called karyogamy.
(iii) Meiosis in zygote resulting in haploid spores.
    When a fungus reproduces sexually, two haploid
hyphae of compatible mating types come together and
fuse. In some fungi the fusion of two haploid cells
immediately results in diploid cells (2n). However, in other
fungi (ascomycetes and basidiomycetes), an intervening
dikaryotic stage (n + n, i.e., two nuclei per cell) occurs;
such a condition is called a dikaryon and the phase is
called dikaryophase of fungus. Later, the parental nuclei
fuse and the cells become diploid. The fungi form fruiting
bodies in which reduction division occurs, leading to                      (a)
formation of haploid spores.
    The morphology of the mycelium, mode of spore
formation and fruiting bodies form the basis for the
division of the kingdom into various classes.

2.3.1 Phycomycetes
Members of phycomycetes are found in aquatic habitats
and on decaying wood in moist and damp places or as
                                                                         (b)
obligate parasites on plants. The mycelium is aseptate
and coenocytic. Asexual reproduction takes place by
zoospores (motile) or by aplanospores (non-motile). These
spores are endogenously produced in sporangium. A
zygospore is formed by fusion of two gametes. These
gametes are similar in morphology (isogamous) or
dissimilar (anisogamous or oogamous). Some common
examples are Mucor (Figure 2.5a), Rhizopus (the bread
mould mentioned earlier) and Albugo (the parasitic fungi
on mustard).

2.3.2 Ascomycetes
Commonly known as sac-fungi, the as comycetes are mostly               (c)
multicellular, e.g., Penicillium, or rarely unicellular, e.g., yeast
(Saccharomyces). They are saprophytic, decomposers, Figure 2.5 Fungi: (a) Mucor
parasitic or coprophilous (growing on dung). Mycelium                (b) Aspergillus (c) Agaricus
24                                                                        BIOLOGY


     is branched and septate. The asexual spores are conidia produced
     exogenously on the special mycelium called conidiophores. Conidia on
     germination produce mycelium. Sexual spores are called ascospores
     which are produced endogenously in sac like asci (singular ascus). These
     asci are arranged in different types of fruiting bodies called ascocarps.
     Some examples are Aspergillus (Figure 2.5b), Claviceps and Neurospora.
     Neurospora is used extensively in biochemical and genetic work. Many
     members like morels and truffles are edible and are considered delicacies.

     2.3.3 Basidiomycetes
     Commonly known forms of basidiomycetes are mushrooms, bracket fungi
     or puffballs. They grow in soil, on logs and tree stumps and in living
     plant bodies as parasites, e.g., rusts and smuts. The mycelium is branched
     and septate. The asexual spores are generally not found, but vegetative
     reproduction by fragmentation is common. The sex organs are absent,
     but plasmogamy is brought about by fusion of two vegetative or somatic
     cells of different strains or genotypes. The resultant structure is dikaryotic
     which ultimately gives rise to basidium. Karyogamy and meiosis take
     place in the basidium producing four basidiospores. The basidiospores
     are exogenously produced on the basidium (pl.: basidia). The basidia are
     arranged in fruiting bodies called basidiocarps. Some common members
     are Agaricus (mushroom) (Figure 2.5c), Ustilago (smut) and Puccinia (rust
     fungus).

     2.3.4 Deuteromycetes
     Commonly known as imperfect fungi because only the asexual or
     vegetative phases of these fungi are known. When the sexual forms of
     these fungi were discovered they were moved into classes they rightly
     belong to. It is also possible that the asexual and vegetative stage have
     been given one name (and placed under deuteromycetes) and the sexual
     stage another (and placed under another class). Later when the linkages
     were established, the fungi were correctly identified and moved out of
     deuteromycetes. Once perfect (sexual) stages of members of
     dueteromycetes were discovered they were often moved to ascomycetes
     and basidiomycetes. The deuteromycetes reproduce only by asexual spores
     known as conidia. The mycelium is septate and branched. Some members
     are saprophytes or parasites while a large number of them are
     decomposers of litter and help in mineral cycling. Some examples are
     Alternaria, Colletotrichum and Trichoderma.
     BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                 25


2.4 KINGDOM PLANTAE

Kingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing
organisms commonly called plants. A few members are partially
heterotrophic such as the insectivorous plants or parasites. Bladderwort
and Venus fly trap are examples of insectivorous plants and Cuscuta is a
parasite. The plant cells have an eukaryotic structure with prominent
chloroplasts and cell wall mainly made of cellulose. You will study the
eukaryotic cell structure in detail in Chapter 8. Plantae includes algae,
bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms.
    Life cycle of plants has two distinct phases – the diploid sporophytic
and the haploid gametophytic – that alternate with each other. The lengths
of the haploid and diploid phases, and whether these phases are free–
living or dependent on others, vary among different groups in plants.
This phenomenon is called alternation of generation. You will study
further details of this kingdom in Chapter 3.


2.5 KINGDOM ANIMALIA

This kingdom is characterised by heterotrophic eukaryotic organisms
that are multicellular and their cells lack cell walls. They directly or
indirectly depend on plants for food. They digest their food in an internal
cavity and store food reserves as glycogen or fat. Their mode of nutrition
is holozoic – by ingestion of food. They follow a definite growth pattern
and grow into adults that have a definite shape and size. Higher forms
show elaborate sensory and neuromotor mechanism. Most of them are
capable of locomotion.
    The sexual reproduction is by copulation of male and female followed
by embryological development. Salient features of various phyla are
described in Chapter 4.


2.6 VIRUSES, VIROIDS AND LICHENS

In the five kingdom classification of Whittaker there is no mention of some
acellular organisms like viruses and viroids, and lichens. These are briefly
introduced here.
    All of us who have suffered the ill effects of common cold or ‘flu’ know
what effects viruses can have on us, even if we do not associate it with our
condition. Viruses did not find a place in classification since they are not
truly ‘living’, if we understand living as those organisms that have a cell
structure. The viruses are non-cellular organisms that are characterised
by having an inert crystalline structure outside the living cell. Once they
26                                                                                    BIOLOGY




                                                                                     Head



                                                                                     Collar
                                              Sheath




     RNA   Capsid
                                                             Tail fibres

               (a)                                                   (b)


           Figure 2.6 (a) Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV) (b) Bacteriophage

                infect a cell they take over the machinery of the host cell to replicate
                themselves, killing the host. Would you call viruses living or non-living?
                     The name virus that means venom or poisonous fluid was given by
                Pasteur. D.J. Ivanowsky (1892) recognised certain microbes as causal
                organism of the mosaic disease of tobacco (Figure 2.6a). These were found
                to be smaller than bacteria because they passed through bacteria-proof
                filters. M.W. Beijerinek (1898) demonstrated that the extract of the infected
                plants of tobacco could cause infection in healthy plants and called the
                fluid as Contagium vivum fluidum (infectious living fluid). W.M. Stanley
                (1935) showed that viruses could be crystallised and crystals consist
                largely of proteins. They are inert outside their specific host cell. Viruses
                are obligate parasites.
                     In addition to proteins, viruses also contain genetic material, that could
                be either RNA or DNA. No virus contains both RNA and DNA. A virus is
                a nucleoprotein and the genetic material is infectious. In general, viruses
                that infect plants have single stranded RNA and viruses that infect animals
                have either single or double stranded RNA or double stranded DNA.
                Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages (viruses that infect the bacteria) are
                usually double stranded DNA viruses (Figure 2.6b). The protein coat
                called capsid made of small subunits called capsomeres, protects the
                nucleic acid. These capsomeres are arranged in helical or polyhedral
                geometric forms. Viruses cause diseases like mumps, small pox, herpes
                and influenza. AIDS in humans is also caused by a virus. In plants, the
                symptoms can be mosaic formation, leaf rolling and curling, yellowing
                and vein clearing, dwarfing and stunted growth.
     BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION                                                               27


Viroids : In 1971, T.O. Diener discovered a new infectious agent that
was smaller than viruses and caused potato spindle tuber disease. It was
found to be a free RNA; it lacked the protein coat that is found in viruses,
hence the name viroid. The RNA of the viroid was of low molecular weight.
Lichens : Lichens are symbiotic associations i.e. mutually useful
associations, between algae and fungi. The algal component is known as
phycobiont and fungal component as mycobiont, which are autotrophic
and heterotrophic, respectively. Algae prepare food for fungi and fungi
provide shelter and absorb mineral nutrients and water for its partner.
So close is their association that if one saw a lichen in nature one would
never imagine that they had two different organisms within them. Lichens
are very good pollution indicators – they do not grow in polluted areas.




                                              SUMMARY

       Biological classification of plants and animals was first proposed by Aristotle on
       the basis of simple morphological characters. Linnaeus later classified all living
       organisms into two kingdoms – Plantae and Animalia. Whittaker proposed an
       elaborate five kingdom classification – Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae and
       Animalia. The main criteria of the five kingdom classification were cell structure,
       body organisation, mode of nutrition and reproduction, and phylogenetic
       relationships.
           In the five kingdom classification, bacteria are included in Kingdom Monera.
       Bacteria are cosmopolitan in distribution. These organisms show the most extensive
       metabolic diversity. Bacteria may be autotrophic or heterotrophic in their mode of
       nutrition. Kingdom Protista includes all single-celled eukaryotes such as
       Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime-moulds and Protozoans. Protists
       have defined nucleus and other membrane bound organelles. They reproduce
       both asexually and sexually. Members of Kingdom Fungi show a great diversity
       in structures and habitat. Most fungi are saprophytic in their mode of nutrition.
       They show asexual and sexual reproduction. Phycomycetes, Ascomycetes,
       Basidiomycetes and Deuteromycetes are the four classes under this kingdom.
       The plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing organisms. Algae,
       bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms are included in this
       group. The life cycle of plants exhibit alternation of generations – gametophytic
       and sporophytic generations. The heterotrophic eukaryotic, multicellular
       organisms lacking a cell wall are included in the Kingdom Animalia. The mode of
       nutrition of these organisms is holozoic. They reproduce mostly by the sexual
       mode. Some acellular organisms like viruses and viroids as well as the lichens are
       not included in the five kingdom system of classification.
28                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                           EXERCISES

      1. Discuss how classification systems have undergone several changes over a
         period of time?
      2. State two economically important uses of:
         (a) heterotrophic bacteria
         (b) archaebacteria
      3. What is the nature of cell-walls in diatoms?
      4. Find out what do the terms ‘algal bloom’ and ‘red-tides’ signify.
      5. How are viroids different from viruses?
      6. Describe briefly the four major groups of Protozoa.
      7. Plants are autotrophic. Can you think of some plants that are partially
         heterotrophic?
      8. What do the terms phycobiont and mycobiont signify?
      9. Give a comparative account of the classes of Kingdom Fungi under the following:
          (i) mode of nutrition
         (ii) mode of reproduction
     10. What are the characteristic features of Euglenoids?
     11. Give a brief account of viruses with respect to their structure and nature of
         genetic material. Also name four common viral diseases.
     12. Organise a discussion in your class on the topic – Are viruses living or non-
         living?
 100                                                                                           BIOLOGY




                           CHAPTER 7
                           STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION                                      IN

                           ANIMALS
7.1 Animal Tissues    In the preceding chapters you came across a large variety of organisms,
                      both unicellular and multicellular, of the animal kingdom. In unicellular
7.2 Organ and Organ
                      organisms, all functions like digestion, respiration and reproduction
    System
                      are performed by a single cell. In the complex body of multicellular
7.3 Earthworm         animals the same basic functions are carried out by different groups of
7.4 Cockroach         cells in a well organised manner. The body of a simple organism like
                      Hydra is made of different types of cells and the number of cells in each
7.5 Frogs
                      type can be in thousands. The human body is composed of billions of
                      cells to perform various functions. How do these cells in the body work
                      together? In multicellular animals, a group of similar cells alongwith
                      intercellular substances perform a specific function. Such an organisation
                      is called tissue.
                          You may be surprised to know that all complex animals consist of
                      only four basic types of tissues. These tissues are organised in specific
                      proportion and pattern to form an organ like stomach, lung, heart and
                      kidney. When two or more organs perform a common function by their
                      physical and/or chemical interaction, they together form organ system,
                      e.g., digestive system, respiratory system, etc. Cells, tissues, organs and
                      organ systems split up the work in a way that exhibits division of labour
                      and contribute to the survival of the body as a whole.

                      7.1 ANIMAL TISSUES
                      The structure of the cells vary according to their function. Therefore, the
                      tissues are different and are broadly classified into four types : (i) Epithelial,
                      (ii) Connective, (iii) Muscular and (iv) Neural.
     STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                          101


7.1.1 Epithelial Tissue
We commonly refer to an epithelial tissue as epithelium (pl.: epithelia).
This tissue has a free surface, which faces either a body fluid or the outside
environment and thus provides a covering or a lining for some part of the
body. The cells are compactly packed with little intercellular matrix. There
are two types of epithelial tissues namely simple epithelium and
compound epithelium. Simple epithelium is composed of a single layer
of cells and functions as a lining for body cavities, ducts, and tubes. The
compound epithelium consists of two or more cell layers and has protective
function as it does in our skin.
      On the basis of structural modification of the cells, simple epithelium
is further divided into three types. These are (i) Squamous, (ii) Cuboidal,
(iii) Columnar (Figure 7.1).




      Flattened cell
           (a)
                                         Cube-like cell
                                               (b)

                                             Tall cell
                                                                           (d)
                         (c)

       Figure 7.1 Simple epithelium: (a) Squamous (b) Cuboidal (c) Columnar
                  (d) Columnar cells bearing cilia

    The squamous epithelium is made of a single thin layer of flattened
cells with irregular boundaries. They are found in the walls of blood vessels
and air sacs of lungs and are involved in functions like forming a diffusion
boundary. The cuboidal epithelium is composed of a single layer of
cube-like cells. This is commonly found in ducts of glands and tubular
parts of nephrons in kidneys and its main functions are secretion and
absorption. The epithelium of proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) of
nephron in the kidney has microvilli. The columnar epithelium is
composed of a single layer of tall and slender cells. Their nuclei are located
at the base. Free surface may have microvilli. They are found in the lining
of stomach and intestine and help in secretion and absorption. If the
columnar or cuboidal cells bear cilia on their free surface they are called
ciliated epithelium (Figure 7.1d). Their function is to move particles or
mucus in a specific direction over the epithelium. They are mainly present
in the inner surface of hollow organs like bronchioles and fallopian tubes.
 102                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                                                            Some of the columnar or cuboidal cells
                                                        get specialised for secretion and are called
                                                        glandular epithelium (Figure 7.2). They
                   unicellular                          are mainly of two types: unicellular,
                     gland
                                                        consisting of isolated glandular cells (goblet
                                                        cells of the alimentary canal), and
                                                        multicellular, consisting of cluster of cells
                    Multicelluar
                      gland                             (salivary gland). On the basis of the mode of
       (a)                                (b)           pouring of their secretions, glands are
                                                        divided into two categories namely
Figure 7.2   Glandular epithelium : (a) Unicellular
             (b) Multicellular                          exocrine and endocrine glands. Exocrine
                                                        glands secrete mucus, saliva, earwax, oil,
                                                        milk, digestive enzymes and other cell
                                                        products. These products are released
                                                        through ducts or tubes. In contrast,
                                                        endocrine glands do not have ducts. Their
                                                        products called hormones are secreted
                                                        directly into the fluid bathing the gland.
                                                            Compound epithelium is made of more
                                        Multi-
                                        layered         than one layer (multi-layered) of cells and thus
                                        cells           has a limited role in secretion and absorption
                                                        (Figure 7.3). Their main function is to provide
                                                        protection against chemical and mechanical
                                                        stresses. They cover the dry surface of the skin,
         Figure 7.3 Compound epithelium
                                                        the moist surface of buccal cavity, pharynx,
                                                        inner lining of ducts of salivary glands and of
                                                        pancreatic ducts.
                            All cells in epithelium are held together with little intercellular material.
                        In nearly all animal tissues, specialised junctions provide both structural
                        and functional links between its individual cells. Three types of cell junctions
                        are found in the epithelium and other tissues. These are called as tight,
                        adhering and gap junctions. Tight junctions help to stop substances
                        from leaking across a tissue. Adhering junctions perform cementing to
                        keep neighbouring cells together. Gap junctions facilitate the cells to
                        communicate with each other by connecting the cytoplasm of adjoining
                        cells, for rapid transfer of ions, small molecules and sometimes big molecules.


                        7.1.2 Connective Tissue
                        Connective tissues are most abundant and widely distributed in the body
                        of complex animals. They are named connective tissues because of their
                        special function of linking and supporting other tissues/organs of the
                        body. They range from soft connective tissues to specialised types, which
     STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                         103


   Macro-
   phage

                                                                                           Fat storage
Fibroblast                                                                                 area

  Collagen                                                                                 Nucleus
  fibers
  fibres
                                                                                           Plasma
                                                                                           Membrane

                                                                            (b)
                                    (a)              Mast
                                                     cell
             Figure 7.4 Loose connective tissue : (a) Areolar tissue (b) Adipose tissue

include cartilage, bone, adipose, and blood. In all
connective tissues except blood, the cells secrete fibres of
structural proteins called collagen or elastin. The fibres
provide strength, elasticity and flexibility to the tissue.
These cells also secrete modified polysaccharides, which
accumulate between cells and fibres and act as
matrix (ground substance). Connective tissues are
classified into three types: (i) Loose connective tissue,
(ii) Dense connective tissue and (iii) Specialised
connective tissue.
     Loose connective tissue has cells and fibres loosely
arranged in a semi-fluid ground substance, for example,
areolar tissue present beneath the skin (Figure 7.4). Often
it serves as a support framework for epithelium. It             (a)
contains fibroblasts (cells that produce and secrete fibres),             Collagen fibre
macrophages and mast cells. Adipose tissue is another
type of loose connective tissue located mainly beneath the
skin. The cells of this tissue are specialised to store fats.
The excess of nutrients which are not used immediately
are converted into fats and are stored in this tissue.
     Fibres and fibroblasts are compactly packed in the
dense connective tissues. Orientation of fibres show a
regular or irregular pattern and are called dense regular
and dense irregular tissues. In the dense regular
connective tissues, the collagen fibres are present in rows
between many parallel bundles of fibres. Tendons, which
attach skeletal muscles to bones and ligaments which
attach one bone to another are examples of this tissue.         (b)
Dense irregular connective tissue has fibroblasts and           Figure 7.5 Dense connective tissue:
many fibres (mostly collagen) that are oriented differently                (a) Dense regular
(Figure 7.5). This tissue is present in the skin. Cartilage,               (b) Dense irregular
 104                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                                     bones and blood are various types of specialised
                                     connective tissues.
                                          The intercellular material of cartilage is solid and pliable
                                     and resists compression. Cells of this tissue (chondrocytes)
                                     are enclosed in small cavities within the matrix secreted by
                                     them (Figure 7.6a). Most of the cartilages in vertebrate
                                     embryos are replaced by bones in adults. Cartilage is
       (a)                           present in the tip of nose, outer ear joints, between adjacent
                                     bones of the vertebral column, limbs and hands in adults.
                                          Bones have a hard and non-pliable ground substance
                                     rich in calcium salts and collagen fibres which give bone
                                     its strength (Figure 7.6b). It is the main tissue that provides
                                     structural frame to the body. Bones support and protect
                                     softer tissues and organs. The bone cells (osteocytes) are
                                     present in the spaces called lacunae. Limb bones, such as
       (b)                           the long bones of the legs, serve weight-bearing functions.
                                     They also interact with skeletal muscles attached to them
                                     to bring about movements. The bone marrow in some bones
     RBC                             is the site of production of blood cells.
                                          Blood is a fluid connective tissue containing plasma,
                    Platelets
                                     red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC) and platelets
                                     (Figure 7.6c). It is the main circulating fluid that helps in
             WBC                     the transport of various substances. You will learn more
       (c)                           about blood in Chapters 17 and 18.

Figure 7.6 Specialised connective
           tissues : (a) Cartilage   7.1.3 Muscle Tissue
           (b) Bone (c) Blood
                                     Each muscle is made of many long, cylindrical fibres
                                     arranged in parallel arrays. These fibres are composed of
                                     numerous fine fibrils, called myofibrils. Muscle fibres
                                     contract (shorten) in response to stimulation, then relax
                                     (lengthen) and return to their uncontracted state in a
                                     coordinated fashion. Their action moves the body to adjust
                                     to the changes in the environment and to maintain the
                                     positions of the various parts of the body. In general,
                                     muscles play an active role in all the movements of the body.
                                     Muscles are of three types, skeletal, smooth, and cardiac.
                                         Skeletal muscle tissue is closely attached to skeletal
                                     bones. In a typical muscle such as the biceps, striated
                                     (striped) skeletal muscle fibres are bundled together in a
                                     parallel fashion (Figure 7.7a). A sheath of tough connective
                                     tissue encloses several bundles of muscle fibres (You will
                                     learn more about this in Chapter 20).
    STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                            105


                                                              Smooth                    Striations
                      Striations                              muscle
                                                               fibers
                                                                                         Nucleus




                                                                                         Junction
                                                                                         between
                       Nucleus                                                           adjacent
                                                                                           cells



           (a)                                   (b)                         (c)
      Figure 7.7 Muscle tissue : (a) Skeletal (striated) muscle tissue (b) Smooth muscle tissue
                 (c) Cardiac muscle tissue

    The smooth muscle fibres taper at both ends (fusiform) and do not
show striations (Figure 7.7b). Cell junctions hold them together and they
are bundled together in a connective tissue sheath. The wall of internal
organs such as the blood vessels, stomach and intestine contains this type
of muscle tissue. Smooth muscles are ‘involuntary’ as their functioning
cannot be directly controlled. We usually are not able to make it contract
merely by thinking about it as we can do with skeletal muscles.
    Cardiac muscle tissue is a contractile tissue present only in the heart.
Cell junctions fuse the plasma membranes of cardiac muscle cells and
make them stick together (Figure 7.7c). Communication junctions
(intercalated discs) at some fusion points allow the cells to contract as a
unit, i.e., when one cell receives a signal to contract, its neighbours are
also stimulated to contract.

7.1.4 Neural Tissue
                                                    Axon
Neural tissue exerts the greatest control over
the body’s responsiveness to changing
conditions. Neurons, the unit of neural           Cell
system are excitable cells (Figure 7.8). The      body
neuroglial cell which constitute the rest of      with
                                                 nucleus
the neural system protect and support
                                                 Dendrite
neurons. Neuroglia make up more than one-
half the volume of neural tissue in our body.
    When a neuron is suitably stimulated,        Neuroglea
an electrical disturbance is generated
which swiftly travels along its plasma                       Figure 7.8 Neural tissue (Neuron with
                                                                        neuroglea)
106                                                                        BIOLOGY


      membrane. Arrival of the disturbance at the neuron’s endings, or output
      zone, triggers events that may cause stimulation or inhibition of adjacent
      neurons and other cells (You will study the details in Chapter 21).

      7.2 ORGAN AND ORGAN SYSTEM
      The basic tissues mentioned above organise to form organs which in turn
      associate to form organ systems in the multicellular organisms. Such an
      organisation is essential for more efficient and better coordinated activities
      of millions of cells constituting an organism. Each organ in our body is
      made of one or more type of tissues. For example, our heart consists of all
      the four types of tissues, i.e., epithelial, connective, muscular and neural.
      We also notice, after some careful study that the complexity in organ and
      organ systems displays certain discernable trend. This discernable trend
      is called evolutionary trend (You will study the details in class XII). You
      are being introduced to morphology and anatomy of three organisms at
      different evolutionary levels to show their organisation and functioning.
      Morphology refers to study of form or externally visible features. In the
      case of plants or microbes, the term morphology precisely means only
      this. In case of animals this refers to the external appearance of the organs
      or parts of the body. The word anatomy conventionally is used for the
      study of morphology of internal organs in the animals. You will learn the
      morphology and anatomy of earthworm, cockroach and frog representing
      invertebrates and vertebrates.


      7.3 EARTHWORM
      Earthworm is a reddish brown terrestrial invertebrate that inhabits the
      upper layer of the moist soil. During day time, they live in burrows made
      by boring and swallowing the soil. In the gardens, they can be traced by
      their faecal deposits known as worm castings. The common Indian
      earthworms are Pheretima and Lumbricus.

      7.3.1 Morphology
      Earthworms have long cylindrical body. The body is divided into more
      than hundred short segments which are similar (metameres about
      100-120 in number). The dorsal surface of the body is marked by a dark
      median mid dorsal line (dorsal blood vessel) along the longitudinal axis of
      the body. The ventral surface is distinguished by the presence of genital
      openings (pores). Anterior end consists of the mouth and the prostomium,
      a lobe which serves as a covering for the mouth and as a wedge to force
      open cracks in the soil into which the earthworm may crawl. The prostomium
      is sensory in function. The first body segment is called the peristomium
      (buccal segment) which contains the mouth. In a mature worm, segments
     STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                    107




        Figure 7.9 Body of earthworm : (a) dorsal view (b) ventral view (c) lateral view
                   showing mouth opening

14-16 are covered by a prominent dark band of glandular tissue called
clitellum. Thus the body is divisible into three prominent regions –
preclitellar, clitellar and postclitellar segments (Figure 7.9).
    Four pairs of spermathecal apertures are situated on the ventro-lateral
sides of the intersegmental grooves, i.e., 5th -9th segments. A single female
genital pore is present in the mid-ventral line of 14th segment. A pair of
male genital pores are present on the ventro-lateral sides of the 18th
segment. Numerous minute pores called nephridiopores open on the
surface of the body. In each body segment, except the first, last and
clitellum, there are rows of S-shaped setae, embedded in the epidermal
pits in the middle of each segment. Setae can be extended or retracted.
Their principal role is in locomotion.

7.3.2 Anatomy
The body wall of the earthworm is covered externally by a thin non-cellular
cuticle below which is the epidermis, two muscle layers (circular and
longitudinal) and an innermost coelomic epithelium. The epidermis is made
 108                                                                                                 BIOLOGY


                                                           up of a single layer of columnar epithelial cells
                                                           which contain secretory gland cells.
                                                                 The alimentary canal is a straight tube and
                                                           runs between first to last segment of the body.
                                                           (Figure 7.10). A terminal mouth opens into the
                                                           buccal cavity (1-3 segments) which leads into
                    1                                      muscular pharynx. A small narrow tube,
                2                        Mouth
            3                                              oesophagus (5-7 segments), continues into a
        4
       5                                                   muscular gizzard (8-9 segments). It helps in
                                         Pharynx           grinding the soil particles and decaying leaves,
      6
   7                                                       etc. The stomach extends from 9-14 segments.
 8                                                         The food of the earthworm is decaying leaves and
                                       Oesophagus
 9                                                         organic matter mixed with soil. Calciferous
10                                                         glands, present in the stomach, neutralise the
                                         Gizzard
 11                                                        humic acid present in humus. Intestine starts
12                                                         from the 15th segment onwards and continues
13                                       Stomach           till the last segment. A pair of short and conical
14                                                         intestinal caecae project from the intestine on the
15                                                         26th segment. The characteristic feature of the
16                                                         intestine after 26th segment except the last
17                                     Pre-typhlosolar
18                                     part of intestine   23rd-25th segments is the presence of internal
19                                                         median fold of dorsal wall called typhlosole. This
20                                                         increases the effective area of absorption in the
 21                                                        intestine. The alimentary canal opens to the
22                                       Intestinal        exterior by a small rounded aperture called anus.
 23                                      caecum            The ingested organic rich soil passes through the
 24
                                                           digestive tract where digestive enzymes
25
                                                           breakdown complex food into smaller absorbable
26                                     Lymph gland         units. These simpler molecules are absorbed
27
28                                    Typhlosolar          through intestinal membranes and are utilised.
29                                    part of intestine              Pheretima exhibits a closed type of
 30                                    Intestinal lumen    blood vascular system, consisting of blood
 31                                                        vessels, capillaries and heart. (Figure 7.11). Due
 32                                                        to closed circulatory system, blood is confined
 33                                      Typhlosole
                                                           to the heart and blood vessels. Contractions
 34
                                                           keep blood circulating in one direction. Smaller
                                                           blood vessels supply the gut, nerve cord, and
                                                           the body wall. Blood glands are present on the
Figure 7.10             Alimentary canal of earthworm      4th, 5th and 6th segments. They produce blood
                                                           cells and haemoglobin which is dissolved in
                                                           blood plasma. Blood cells are phagocytic in
                                                           nature. Earthworms lack specialised breathing
                                                           devices. Respiratory exchange occurs through
                                                           moist body surface into their blood stream.
    STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                    109




                             Figure 7.11 Closed circulatory system

                                                  The excretory organs occur as segmentally
                                             arranged coiled tubules called nephridia
                                             (sing.: nephridium). They are of three types:
                                             (i) septal nephridia, present on both the sides of
               Mouth                         intersegmental septa of segment 15 to the last
                               Ducts of      that open into intestine, (ii) integumentary
Buccal cavity
                              pharyngeal     nephridia, attached to lining of the body wall of
                               nephridia     segment 3 to the last that open on the body
   Pharynx
                                             surface and (iii) pharyngeal nephridia, present
    Blood                      Tufts of
    glands                                   as three paired tufts in the 4th, 5th and 6th
                             pharyngeal
                              nephridia      segments (Figure 7.12). These different types of
                                             nephridia are basically similar in structure.
                                             Nephridia regulate the volume and composition
                             Intergumentary of the body fluids. A nephridium starts out as a
                             nephridia       funnel that collects excess fluid from coelomic
                                             chamber. The funnel connects with a tubular part
                               Forests of    of the nephridium which delivers the wastes
                               integumentary through a pore to the surface in the body wall
                               nephridia
                                             into the digestive tube.
                              Septal              Nervous system is basically represented by
                              nephridia
                                             ganglia arranged segmentwise on the ventral
                                             paired nerve cord. The nerve cord in the anterior
                                             region (3rd and 4th segments) bifurcates, laterally
 Figure 7.12 Nephridial system in earthworm
                                             encircling the pharynx and joins the cerebral
                                             ganglia dorsally to form a nerve ring. The cerebral
                                             ganglia alongwith other nerves in the ring
                                             integrate sensory input as well as command
                                             muscular responses of the body.
 110                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                                                 Sensory system does not have eyes but does
                                             possess light and touch sensitive organs (receptor
                                             cells) to distinguish the light intensities and to feel
                                             the vibrations in the ground. Worms have
                                             specialised chemoreceptors (taste receptors) which
                                             react to chemical stimuli. These sense organs are
                                             located on the anterior part of the worm.
                                                 Earthworm is hermaphrodite (bisexual), i.e.,
                                             testes and ovaries are present in the same
                                             individual (Figure 7.13). There are two pairs of
                                             testes present in the 10th and 11th segments.
                                             Their vasa deferentia run up to the 18th segment
                                             where they join the prostatic duct. Two pairs of
                                             accessory glands are present one pair each in
                                             the 17th and 19th segments. The common prostate
                                             and spermatic duct (vasa deferentia) opens to
                                             the exterior by a pair of male genital pores on
                                             the ventro-lateral side of the 18th segment. Four
                                             pairs of spermathecae are located in 6th-9th
                                             segments (one pair in each segment). They receive
                                             and store spermatozoa during copulation. One
                                             pair of ovaries is attached at the inter-segmental
                                             septum of the 12th and 13th segments. Ovarian
                                             funnels are present beneath the ovaries which
                                             continue into oviduct, join together and open on
                                             the ventral side as a single median female genital
                                             pore on the 14th segment.
                                                 A mutual exchange of sperm occurs between
                                             two worms during mating. One worm has to find
                                             another worm and they mate juxtaposing
                                             opposite gonadal openings exchanging packets
                                             of sperms called spermatophores. Mature sperm
                                             and egg cells and nutritive fluid are deposited in
                                             cocoons produced by the gland cells of clitellum.
                                             Fertilisation and development occur within the
Figure 7.13 Reproductive system of earthworm
                                             cocoons which are deposited in soil. The ova
                                             (eggs) are fertilised by the sperm cells within the
                                             cocoon which then slips off the worm and is
                                             deposited in or on the soil. The cocoon holds the
                                             worm embryos. After about 3 weeks, each cocoon
                                             produces two to twenty baby worms with an
                                             average of four. Development of earthworms is
                                             direct, i.e., there is no larva formed.
    STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                               111


    Earthworms are known as ‘friends of farmers’ because they make
burrows in the soil and make it porous which helps in respiration and
penetration of the developing plant roots. The process of increasing fertility
of soil by the earthworms is called vermicomposting. They are also used
as bait in game fishing.


7.4 COCKROACH

Cockroaches are brown or black bodied animals that are included in
class Insecta of Phylum Arthropoda. Bright yellow, red and green coloured
cockroaches have also been reported in tropical regions. Their size ranges
from ¼ inches to 3 inches (0.6-7.6 cm) and have long antenna, legs and
flat extension of the upper body wall that conceals head. They are
nocturnal omnivores that live in damp places throughout the world. They
have become residents of human homes and thus are serious pests and
vectors of several diseases.

7.4.1 Morphology
The adults of the common species of cockroach, Periplaneta americana
are about 34-53 mm long with wings that extend beyond the tip of the
abdomen in males. The body of the cockroach is segmented and divisible
into three distinct regions – head, thorax and abdomen (Figure 7.14).
The entire body is covered by a hard chitinous exoskeleton (brown in
colour). In each segment, exoskeleton has hardened plates called sclerites
(tergites dorsally and sternites ventrally) that are joined to each other by
a thin and flexible articular membrane (arthrodial membrane).




                                        Figure 7.14 External features of cockroach
112                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                         Head is triangular in shape and lies anteriorly at right angles to the
                     longitudinal body axis. It is formed by the fusion of six segments and
                     shows great mobility in all directions due to flexible neck (Figure 7.15).
                     The head capsule bears a pair of compound eyes. A pair of thread like
                     antennae arise from membranous sockets lying in front of eyes. Antennae
                     have sensory receptors that help in monitoring the environment. Anterior
                     end of the head bears appendages forming biting and chewing type of
                     mouth parts. The mouthparts consisting of a labrum (upper lip), a pair
                     of mandibles, a pair of maxillae and a labium (lower lip). A median flexible
                     lobe, acting as tongue (hypopharynx), lies within the cavity enclosed by
                     the mouthparts (Figure 7.15b). Thorax consists of three parts – prothorax,
                     mesothorax and metathorax. The head is connected with thorax by a
                     short extension of the prothorax known as the neck. Each thoracic segment
                     bears a pair of walking legs. The first pair of wings arises from mesothorax
                     and the second pair from metathorax. Forewings (mesothoracic) called
                     tegmina are opaque dark and leathery and cover the hind wings when at
                     rest. The hind wings are transparent, membranous and are used in flight.
                         The abdomen in both males and females consists of 10 segments. In
                     females, the 7th sternum is boat shaped and together with the 8th and 9th
                     sterna forms a brood or genital pouch whose anterior part contains female
                     gonopore, spermathecal pores and collateral glands. In males, genital pouch
                     or chamber lies at the hind end of abdomen bounded dorsally by 9th and
                     10th terga and ventrally by the 9th sternum. It contains dorsal anus, ventral
                     male genital pore and gonapophysis. Males bear a pair of short, thread-
                     like anal styles which are absent in females. In both sexes, the 10th segment
                     bears a pair of jointed filamentous structures called anal cerci.


              Ocellus
                           Compound eye
                                                                       Labrum
                                                           Grinding
                                                           region
                                                           Incising
                                                  Mandible region
                                                                                     Mandible

                                                                    Hypopharynx

                                    Maxilla

       Mandible

            Labrum


                                                      Maxilla                             Maxilla
                                                                        Labium
                     (a)         Labium
                                                                        (b)
      Figure 7.15 Head region of cockroach : (a) parts of head region (b) mouth parts
    STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                    113


7.4.2 Anatomy                                        Salivary gland
                                                                        Pharynx

The alimentary canal present in the body cavity
is divided into three regions: foregut, midgut            Salivary
                                                          reservoir
and hindgut (Figure 7.16). The mouth opens
into a short tubular pharynx, leading to a         Oesophagus
narrow tubular passage called oesophagus.
This in turn opens into a sac like structure                Crop
called crop used for storing of food. The crop
is followed by gizzard or proventriculus. It has        Gizzard
an outer layer of thick circular muscles and
                                                  Hepatic caeca
thick inner cuticle forming six highly chitinous
plate called teeth. Gizzard helps in grinding the  Mesenteron
food particles. The entire foregut is lined by       or midgut
cuticle. A ring of 6-8 blind tubules called         Malpighian
hepatic or gastric caecae is present at the           tubules
                                                                                          Rectum
junction of foregut and midgut, which secrete           Ileum
digestive juice. At the junction of midgut and
hindgut is present another ring of 100-150                 Colon
yellow coloured thin filamentous Malpighian
                                                   Figure 7.16 Alimentary canal of cockroach
tubules. They help in removal of excretory
products from haemolymph. The hindgut is
broader than midgut and is differentiated into
ileum, colon and rectum. The rectum opens                                   Anterior aorta
out through anus.
     Blood vascular system of cockroach is an
open type (Figure 7.17). Blood vessels are
                                                                           Alary muscles
poorly developed and open into space
(haemocoel). Visceral organs located in the
haemocoel are bathed in blood (haemolymph).
The haemolymph is composed of colourless
plasma and haemocytes. Heart of cockroach
consists of elongated muscular tube lying
along mid dorsal line of thorax and abdomen.
It is differentiated into funnel shaped chambers
with ostia on either side. Blood from sinuses
enter heart through ostia and is pumped                                   Chambers
                                                                          of heart
anteriorly to sinuses again.
     The respiratory system consists of a
network of trachea, that open through 10 pairs
of small holes called spiracles present on the
lateral side of the body. Thin branching tubes
(tracheal tubes subdivided into tracheoles)
carry oxygen from the air to all the parts. The Figure 7.17 Open circulatory system of cockroach
114                                                                        BIOLOGY


      opening of the spiracles is regulated by the sphincters. Exchange of gases
      take place at the tracheoles by diffusion.
          Excretion is performed by Malpighian tubules. Each tubule is lined
      by glandular and ciliated cells. They absorb nitrogenous waste products
      and convert them into uric acid which is excreted out through the hindgut.
      Therefore, this insect is called uricotelic. In addition, the fat body,
      nephrocytes and urecose glands also help in excretion.
          The nervous system of cockroach consists of a series of fused,
      segmentally arranged ganglia joined by paired longitudinal connectives
      on the ventral side. Three ganglia lie in the thorax, and six in the abdomen.
      The nervous system of cockroach is spread throughout the body. The
      head holds a bit of a nervous system while the rest is situated along the
      ventral (belly-side) part of its body. So, now you understand that if the
      head of a cockroach is cut off, it will still live for as long as one week. In
      the head region, the brain is represented by supra-oesophageal ganglion
      which supplies nerves to antennae and compound eyes. In cockroach,
      the sense organs are antennae, eyes, maxillary palps, labial palps, anal
      cerci, etc. The compound eyes are situated at the dorsal surface of the
      head. Each eye consists of about 2000 hexagonal ommatidia
      (sing.: ommatidium). With the help of several ommatidia, a cockroach can
      receive several images of an object. This kind of vision is known as mosaic
      vision with more sensitivity but less resolution, being common during
      night (hence called nocturnal vision).
          Cockroaches are dioecious and both sexes have well developed
      reproductive organs (Figure 7.18). Male reproductive system consists of
      a pair of testes one lying on each lateral side in the 4th -6th abdominal
      segments. From each testis arises a thin vas deferens, which opens into
      ejaculatory duct through seminal vesicle. The ejaculatory duct opens into
      male gonopore situated ventral to anus. A characteristic mushroom-
      shaped gland is present in the 6th-7th abdominal segments which functions
      as an accessory reproductive gland. The external genitalia are represented
      by male gonapophysis or phallomere (chitinous asymmetrical structures,
      surrounding the male gonopore). The sperms are stored in the seminal
      vesicles and are glued together in the form of bundles called
      spermatophores which are discharged during copulation. The female
      reproductive sysytem consists of two large ovaries, lying laterally in the
      2nd – 6th abdominal segments. Each ovary is formed of a group of eight
      ovarian tubules or ovarioles, containing a chain of developing ova.
      Oviducts of each ovary unite into a single median oviduct (also called
      vagina) which opens into the genital chamber. A pair of spermatheca is
      present in the 6th segment which opens into the genital chamber.
          Sperms are transferred through spermatophores. Their fertilised eggs
      are encased in capsules called oothecae. Ootheca is a dark reddish to
      blackish brown capsule, about 3/8" (8 mm) long. They are dropped or
    STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                            115



                                                              Testis

                                                              Phallic gland
                                                              Small tubules
                                                              Long tubules

                                                              Seminal vesicle
                                                              Vas deferens
                                                              Ejaculatory duct
                                                              Right phallomere
                                                              Ventral phallomere
                                                              Anal cercus
                                                              Caudal style
                   Left phallomere          Pseudopenis
                                     Titillator         (a)




                                                                 Ovary

                                                                Oviduct
        Spermatheca
                                                              Common oviduct
                                                              or vagina

                                                               Collaterial glands

                                                                Genital chamber

        gonapophyses
                                                  (b)
                                                                Vestibulum          ]   Genital
                                                                                        pouch


              Figure 7.18 Reproductive system of cockroach : (a) male (b) female

glued to a suitable surface, usually in a crack or crevice of high relative
humidity near a food source. On an average, females produce 9-10
oothecae, each containing 14-16 eggs. The development of P. americana
is paurometabolous, meaning there is development through nymphal
stage. The nymphs look very much like adults. The nymph grows by
moulting about 13 times to reach the adult form. The next to last nymphal
stage has wing pads but only adult cockroaches have wings.
    Many species of cockroaches are wild and are of no economic importance.
A few species thrive in and around human habitat. They are pests because
they destroy food and contaminate it with their smelly excreta. They can
transmit a variety of bacterial diseases by contaminating food material.
116                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                     7.5 FROGS

                     Frogs can live both on land and in freshwater and belong to class
                     Amphibia of phylum Chordata. The most common species of frog found
                     in India is Rana tigrina.
                         They do not have constant body temperature i.e., their body
                     temperature varies with the temperature of the environment. Such animals
                     are called cold blooded or poikilotherms. You might have also noticed
                     changes in the colour of the frogs while they are in grasses and on dry
                     land. They have the ability to change the colour to hide them from their
                     enemies (camouflage). This protective coloration is called mimicry. You
                     may also know that the frogs are not seen during peak summer and
                     winter. During this period they take shelter in deep burrows to protect
                     them from extreme heat and cold. This is called as summer sleep
                     (aestivation) and winter sleep (hibernation).

                     7.5.1 Morphology
                     Have you ever touched the skin of frog? The skin is smooth and slippery
                     due to the presence of mucus. The skin is always maintained in a moist
                     condition. The colour of dorsal side of body is generally olive green with
                     dark irregular spots. On the ventral side the skin is uniformly pale yellow.
                     The frog never drinks water but absorb it through the skin.
                         Body of a frog is divisible into head and trunk (Figure 7.19). A neck
                     and tail are absent. Above the mouth, a pair of nostrils is present. Eyes
                     are bulged and covered by a nictitating membrane that protects them
                                            while in water. On either side of eyes a membranous
                                Head        tympanum (ear) receives sound signals. The
      Trunk
                                            forelimbs and hind limbs help in swimming,
                                Eye
                                            walking, leaping and burrowing. The hind limbs end
                                            in five digits and they are larger and muscular than
                                            fore limbs that end in four digits. Feet have webbed
                                            digits that help in swimming. Frogs exhibit sexual
                              Fore limb     dimorphism. Male frogs can be distinguished by the
                                            presence of sound producing vocal sacs and also a
                          Hind limb         copulatory pad on the first digit of the fore limbs
                                            which are absent in female frogs.
Figure 7.19 External features of frog
                                           7.5.2 Anatomy
                     The body cavity of frogs accommodate different organ systems such as
                     digestive, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, excretory and reproductive
                     systems with well developed structures and functions (Figure 7.20).
                        The digestive system consists of alimentary canal and digestive glands.
                     The alimentary canal is short because frogs are carnivores and hence the
                     length of intestine is reduced. The mouth opens into the buccal cavity
     STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                         117



                        Heart
                                                             Oesophagus


                                                                    Liver

          Gall
        bladder

          Lung
                                                                        Stomach


               Fat bodies

                   Kidney


                       Ureter                                                           Intestine


         Urinary
         bladder                                                                      Rectum

            Cloaca
                                                                                    Cloacal Aperture

       Figure 7.20 Diagrammatic representation of internal organs of frog showing
                   complete digestive system

that leads to the oesophagus through pharynx. Oesophagus is a short
tube that opens into the stomach which in turn continues as the intestine,
rectum and finally opens outside by the cloaca. Liver secretes bile that is
stored in the gall bladder. Pancreas, a digestive gland produces pancreatic
juice containing digestive enzymes. Food is captured by the bilobed
tongue. Digestion of food takes place by the action of HCl and gastric
juices secreted from the walls of the stomach. Partially digested food
called chyme is passed from stomach to the first part of the intestine, the
duodenum. The duodenum receives bile from gall bladder and pancreatic
juices from the pancreas through a common bile duct. Bile emulsifies fat
and pancreatic juices digest carbohydrates and proteins. Final digestion
takes place in the intestine. Digested food is absorbed by the numerous
finger-like folds in the inner wall of intestine called villi and microvilli. The
undigested solid waste moves into the rectum and passes out through cloaca.
    Frogs respire on land and in the water by two different methods. In
water, skin acts as aquatic respiratory organ (cutaneous respiration).
Dissolved oxygen in the water is exchanged through the skin by diffusion.
118                                                                       BIOLOGY


      On land, the buccal cavity, skin and lungs act as the respiratory organs.
      The respiration by lungs is called pulmonary respiration. The lungs are
      a pair of elongated, pink coloured sac-like structures present in the upper
      part of the trunk region (thorax). Air enters through the nostrils into the
      buccal cavity and then to lungs. During aestivation and hibernation
      gaseous exchange takes place through skin.
          The vascular system of frog is well-developed closed type. Frogs have
      a lymphatic system also. The blood vascular system involves heart, blood
      vessels and blood. The lymphatic system consists of lymph, lymph
      channels and lymph nodes. Heart is a muscular structure situated in the
      upper part of the body cavity. It has three chambers, two atria and one
      ventricle and is covered by a membrane called pericardium. A triangular
      structure called sinus venosus joins the right atrium. It receives blood
      through the major veins called vena cava. The ventricle opens into a sac-
      like conus arteriosus on the ventral side of the heart. The blood from the
      heart is carried to all parts of the body by the arteries (arterial system).
      The veins collect blood from different parts of body to the heart and form
      the venous system. Special venous connection between liver and intestine
      as well as the kidney and lower parts of the body are present in frogs. The
      former is called hepatic portal system and the latter is called renal portal
      system. The blood is composed of plasma and cells. The blood cells are
      RBC (red blood cells) or erythrocytes, WBC (white blood cells) or leucocytes
      and platelets. RBC’s are nucleated and contain red coloured pigment
      namely haemoglobin. The lymph is different from blood. It lacks few
      proteins and RBCs. The blood carries nutrients, gases and water to the
      respective sites during the circulation. The circulation of blood is achieved
      by the pumping action of the muscular heart.
          The elimination of nitrogenous wastes is carried out by a well
      developed excretory system. The excretory system consists of a pair of
      kidneys, ureters, cloaca and urinary bladder. These are compact, dark
      red and bean like structures situated a little posteriorly in the body cavity
      on both sides of vertebral column. Each kidney is composed of several
      structural and functional units called uriniferous tubules or nephrons.
      Two ureters emerge from the kidneys in the male frogs. The ureters act as
      urinogenital duct which opens into the cloaca. In females the ureters and
      oviduct open seperately in the cloaca. The thin-walled urinary bladder is
      present ventral to the rectum which also opens in the cloaca. The frog
      excretes urea and thus is a ureotelic animal. Excretory wastes are carried
      by blood into the kidney where it is separated and excreted.
          The system for control and coordination is highly evolved in the frog. It
      includes both neural system and endocrine glands. The chemical
      coordination of various organs of the body is achieved by hormones which
      are secreted by the endocrine glands. The prominent endocrine glands
      found in frog are pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, thymus, pineal body,
      pancreatic islets, adrenals and gonads. The nervous system is organised
     STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                       119


                                                                        Vasa
into a central nervous system (brain and spinal                      efferentia
cord), a peripheral nervous system (cranial and
spinal nerves) and an autonomic nervous system
                                                                                        Fat
(sympathetic and parasympathetic). There are ten
                                                                                        bodies
pairs of cranial nerves arising from the brain. Brain
is enclosed in a bony structure called brain box         Testis
                                                                                       Kidney
(cranium). The brain is divided into fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain. Forebrain includes            Adrenal
olfactory lobes, paired cerebral hemispheres and        gland
                                                                                       Urino
unpaired diencephalon. The midbrain is
                                                                                       genital duct
characterised by a pair of optic lobes. Hind-brain
consists of cerebellum and medulla oblongata.             Rectum
The medulla oblongata passes out through the                                           Cloaca
foramen magnum and continues into spinal cord,            Urinary                      Cloacal
which is enclosed in the vertebral column.                bladder                      aperture
    Frog has different types of sense organs, namely
organs of touch (sensory papillae), taste (taste          Figure 7.21 Male reproductive system
buds), smell (nasal epithelium), vision (eyes) and
hearing (tympanum with internal ears). Out of
these, eyes and internal ears are well-organised
structures and the rest are cellular aggregations
around nerve endings. Eyes in a frog are a pair of
spherical structures situated in the orbit in skull.
These are simple eyes (possessing only one unit).
External ear is absent in frogs and only tympanum
can be seen externally. The ear is an organ of                                              Oviduct
hearing as well as balancing (equilibrium).
    Frogs have well organised male and female
reproductive systems. Male reproductive organs
consist of a pair of yellowish ovoid testes (Figure                                         Ovary
7.21), which are found adhered to the upper part                                            Ova
of kidneys by a double fold of peritoneum called
mesorchium. Vasa efferentia are 10-12 in
number that arise from testes. They enter the                                               Ureter
kidneys on their side and open into Bidder’s
canal. Finally it communicates with the
urinogenital duct that comes out of the kidneys
and opens into the cloaca. The cloaca is a small,
median chamber that is used to pass faecal                                        Cloaca
matter, urine and sperms to the exterior.                                         Cloacal aperture
    The female reproductive organs include a pair
                                                                                  Urinary
of ovaries (Figure 7.22). The ovaries are situated
                                                                                  bladder
near kidneys and there is no functional
connection with kidneys. A pair of oviduct arising       Figure 7.22 Female reproductive system
120                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                      from the ovaries opens into the cloaca separately. A mature female can
                      lay 2500 to 3000 ova at a time. Fertilisation is external and takes place in
                      water. Development involves a larval stage called tadpole. Tadpole
                      undergoes metamorphosis to form the adult.
                          Frogs are beneficial for mankind because they eat insects and protect
                      the crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance because these serve as an
                      important link of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. In some
                      countries the muscular legs of frog are used as food by man.




                                           SUMMARY

      Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems split up the work in a way that ensures
      the survival of the body as a whole and exhibit division of labour. A tissue is
      defined as group of cells along with intercellular substances performing one or
      more functions in the body. Epithelia are sheet like tissues lining the body’s surface
      and its cavities, ducts and tubes. Epithelia have one free surface facing a body
      fluid or the outside environment. Their cells are structurally and functionally
      connected at junctions.
          Diverse types of connective tissues bind together, support, strengthen, protect,
      and insulate other tissue in the body. Soft connective tissues consist of protein
      fibres as well as a variety of cells arranged in a ground substance. Cartilage, bone,
      blood, and adipose tissue are specialised connective tissues. Cartilage and bone
      are both structural materials. Blood is a fluid tissue with transport functions.
      Adipose tissue is a reservoir of stored energy. Muscle tissue, which can contract
      (shorten) in response to stimulation, helps in movement of the body and specific
      body parts. Skeletal muscle is the muscle tissue attached to bones. Smooth muscle
      is a component of internal organs. Cardiac muscle makes up the contractile walls
      of the heart. Connective tissue covers all three types of tissues. Nervous tissue
      exerts greatest control over the response of body. Neurons are the basic units of
      nervous tissue.
          Earthworm, Cockroach and Frog show characteristic features in body
      organisation. In Pheretima posthuma (earthworm), the body is covered by cuticle.
      All segments of its body are alike except the 14th, 15th and 16th segment, which are
      thick and dark and glandular, forming clitellum. A ring of S-shaped chitinous
      setae is found in each segment. These setae help in locomotion. On the ventral
      side spermathecal openings are present in between the grooves of 5 and 6, 6 and
      7, 7 and 8 and 8 and 9 segments. Female genital pores are present on 14th segment
      and male genital pores on 18th segment. The alimentary canal is a narrow tube
      made of mouth, buccal cavity, pharynx, gizzard, stomach, intestine and anus.
      The blood vascular system is of closed type with heart and valves. Nervous system
      is represented by ventral nerve cord. Earthworm is hermaphorodite. Two pairs of
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS                                                         121


  testes occur in the 10th and 11th segment, respectively. A pair of ovaries are present
  on 12 and 13th intersegmental septum. It is a protandrous animal with cross-
  fertilisation. Fertilisation and development take place in cocoon secreted by the
  glands of clitellum.
       The body of Cockroach (Periplaneta americana) is covered by chitinous
  exoskeleton. It is divided into head, thorax and abdomen. Segments bear jointed
  appendages. There are three segments of thorax, each bearing a pair of walking
  legs. Two pairs of wings are present, one pair each on 2nd and 3rd segment. There
  are ten segments in abdomen. Alimentary canal is well developed with a mouth
  surrounded by mouth parts, a pharynx, oesophagus, crop, gizzard, midgut,
  hindgut and anus. Hepatic caecae are present at the junction of foregut and
  midgut. Malpighian tubules are present at the junction of midgut and hindgut
  and help in excretion. A pair of salivary gland is present near crop. The blood
  vascular system is of open type. Respiration takes place by network of tracheae.
  Trachea opens outside with spiracles. Nervous system is represented by
  segmentally arranged ganglia and ventral nerve cord. A pair of testes is present in
  4th-6th segments and ovaries in 2nd-6th segments. Fertilisation is internal. Female
  produces 9-10 ootheca bearing developing embryos. After rupturing of single
  ootheca sixteen young ones, called nymphs come out.
       The Indian bullfrog, Rana tigrina, is the common frog found in India. Body is
  covered by skin. Mucous glands are present in the skin which is highly vascularised
  and helps in respiration in water and on land. Body is divisible into head and trunk.
  A muscular tongue is present, which is bilobed at the tip and is used in capturing
  the prey. The alimentary canal consists of oesophagous, stomach, intestine and
  rectum, which open into the cloaca. The main digestive glands are liver and pancreas.
  It can respire in water through skin and through lungs on land. Circulatory system
  is closed with single circulation. RBCs are nucleated. Nervous system is organised
  into central, peripheral and autonomic. The organs of urinogenital system are kidneys
  and urinogenital ducts, which open into the cloaca. The male reproductive organ is
  a pair of testes. The female reproductive organ is a pair of ovaries. A female lays
  2500-3000 ova at a time. The fertilisation and development are external. The eggs
  hatch into tadpoles, which metamorphose into frogs.



                                      EXERCISES

   1. Answer in one word or one line.
         (i)   Give the common name of Periplanata americana.
        (ii)   How many spermathecae are found in earthworm?
       (iii)   What is the position of ovaries in cockroach?
       (iv)    How many segments are present in the abdomen of cockroach?
        (v)    Where do you find Malpighian tubules?
122                                                                                      BIOLOGY


       2. Answer the following:
            (i) What is the function of nephridia?
           (ii) How many types of nephridia are found in earthworm based on
                their location?
       3. Draw a labelled diagram of the reproductive organs of an earthworm.
       4. Draw a labelled diagram of alimentary canal of a cockroach.
       5. Distinguish between the followings
           (a) Prostomium and peristomium
           (b) Septal nephridium and pharyngeal nephridium
       6. What are the cellular components of blood?
       7. What are the following and where do you find them in animal body.
           (a) Chondriocytes
           (b) Axons
           (c) Ciliated epithelium
       8. Describe various types of epithelial tissues with the help of labelled diagrams.
       9. Distinguish between
           (a)   Simple epithelium and compound epithelium
           (b)   Cardiac muscle and striated muscle
           (c)   Dense regular and dense irregular connective tissues
           (d)   Adipose and blood tissue
           (e)   Simple gland and compound gland
      10. Mark the odd one in each series:
           (a)   Areolar tissue; blood; neuron; tendon
           (b)   RBC; WBC; platelets; cartilage
           (c)   Exocrine; endocrine; salivary gland; ligament
           (d)   Maxilla; mandible; labrum; antennae
           (e)   Protonema; mesothorax; metathorax; coxa
      11. Match the terms in column I with those in column II:
             Column I                                Column II
           (a)   Compound epithelium           (i)    Alimentary canal
           (b)   Compound eye                 (ii)    Cockroach
           (c)   Septal nephridia            (iii)    Skin
           (d)   Open circulatory system     (iv)     Mosaic vision
           (e)   Typhlosole                   (v)     Earthworm
           (f)   Osteocytes                  (vi)     Phallomere
           (g)   Genitalia                  (vii)     Bone
      12. Mention breifly about the circulatory system of earthworm
      13. Draw a neat diagram of digestive system of frog.
      14. Mention the function of the following
          (a) Ureters in frog
          (b) Malpighian tubules
          (c) Body wall in earthworm
 194                                                                                          BIOLOGY




                             CHAPTER 12
                             MINERAL NUTRITION
12.1 Methods to          The basic needs of all living organisms are essentially the same. They
     Study the           require macromolecules, such as carbohydrates, proteins and fats, and
     Mineral             water and minerals for their growth and development.
     Requirements of        This chapter focusses mainly on inorganic plant nutrition, wherein
     Plants
                         you will study the methods to identify elements essential to growth and
12.2 Essential           development of plants and the criteria for establishing the essentiality.
     Mineral             You will also study the role of the essential elements, their major deficiency
     Elements            symptoms and the mechanism of absorption of these essential elements.
12.3 Mechanism of        The chapter also introduces you briefly to the significance and the
     Absorption of       mechanism of biological nitrogen fixation.
     Elements
12.4 Translocation of
                         12.1     METHODS TO STUDY THE MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF PLANTS
     Solutes
12.5 Soil as Reservoir   In 1860, Julius von Sachs, a prominent German botanist, demonstrated,
     of Essential        for the first time, that plants could be grown to maturity in a defined
     Elements            nutrient solution in complete absence of soil. This technique of growing
12.6 Metabolism of       plants in a nutrient solution is known as hydroponics. Since then, a
     Nitrogen            number of improvised methods have been employed to try and determine
                         the mineral nutrients essential for plants. The essence of all these methods
                         involves the culture of plants in a soil-free, defined mineral solution. These
                         methods require purified water and mineral nutrient salts. Can you
                         explain why this is so essential?
                             After a series of experiments in which the roots of the plants were
                         immersed in nutrient solutions and wherein an element was added /
                         removed or given in varied concentration, a mineral solution suitable for




                                                                                              2017-18
     MINERAL NUTRITION                                                                        195


the plant growth was obtained. By this method,
essential elements were identified and their
deficiency symptoms discovered. Hydroponics has
been successfully employed as a technique for the
commercial production of vegetables such as
tomato, seedless cucumber and lettuce. It must be
emphasised that the nutrient solutions must be
adequately aerated to obtain the optimum growth.
What would happen if solutions were poorly
aerated? Diagrammatic views of the hydroponic
technique is given in Figures 12.1 and 12.2.


12.2 ESSENTIAL MINERAL ELEMENTS
                                                        Figure 12.1 Diagram of a typical set-up for
Most of the minerals present in soil can enter plants               nutrient solution culture
through roots. In fact, more than sixty elements of
the 105 discovered so far are found in different
plants. Some plant species accumulate selenium,
some others gold, while some plants growing near
nuclear test sites take up radioactive strontium.
There are techniques that are able to detect the
minerals even at a very low concentration (10-8 g/
mL). The question is, whether all the diverse mineral
elements present in a plant, for example, gold and
selenium as mentioned above, are really necessary
for plants? How do we decide what is essential for
plants and what is not?

12.2.1 Criteria for Essentiality
The criteria for essentiality of an element are given                    Nutrient
below:                                                                   solution             Pump
(a) The element must be absolutely necessary for        Figure 12.2 Hydroponic plant production.
    supporting normal growth and reproduction.                      Plants are grown in a tube or
                                                                    trough placed on a slight
    In the absence of the element the plants do not                 incline. A pump circulates a
    complete their life cycle or set the seeds.                     nutrient solution from a
(b) The requirement of the element must be specific                 reservoir to the elevated end of
                                                                    the tube. The solution flows
    and not replaceable by another element. In                      down the tube and returns to
    other words, deficiency of any one element                      the reservoir due to gravity.
    cannot be met by supplying some other                           Inset shows a plant whose
    element.                                                        roots are continuously bathed
                                                                    in aerated nutrient solution.
(c) The element must be directly involved in the                    The arrows indicates the
    metabolism of the plant.                                        direction of the flow.




                                                                                               2017-18
196                                                                      BIOLOGY


          Based upon the above criteria only a few elements have been found to
      be absolutely essential for plant growth and metabolism. These elements
      are further divided into two broad categories based on their quantitative
      requirements.
          (i) Macronutrients, and
         (ii) Micronutrients
      Macronutrients are generally present in plant tissues in large amounts
      (in excess of 10 mmole Kg –1 of dry matter). The macronutrients include
      carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorous, sulphur, potassium,
      calcium and magnesium. Of these, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are
      mainly obtained from CO2 and H2O, while the others are absorbed from
      the soil as mineral nutrition.
      Micronutrients or trace elements, are needed in very small amounts
      (less than 10 mmole Kg –1 of dry matter). These include iron, manganese,
      copper, molybdenum, zinc, boron, chlorine and nickel.
          In addition to the 17 essential elements named above, there are some
      beneficial elements such as sodium, silicon, cobalt and selenium. They
      are required by higher plants.
          Essential elements can also be grouped into four broad categories on
      the basis of their diverse functions. These categories are:
          (i) Essential elements as components of biomolecules and hence
              structural elements of cells (e.g., carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and
              nitrogen).
         (ii) Essential elements that are components of energy-related chemical
              compounds in plants (e.g., magnesium in chlorophyll and
              phosphorous in ATP).
         (iii) Essential elements that activate or inhibit enzymes, for example
               Mg2+ is an activator for both ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-
               oxygenase and phosphoenol pyruvate carboxylase, both of which
               are critical enzymes in photosynthetic carbon fixation; Zn2+ is an
               activator of alcohol dehydrogenase and Mo of nitrogenase during
               nitrogen metabolism. Can you name a few more elements that
               fall in this category? For this, you will need to recollect some of
               the biochemical pathways you have studied earlier.
         (iv) Some essential elements can alter the osmotic potential of a cell.
              Potassium plays an important role in the opening and closing of
              stomata. You may recall the role of minerals as solutes in
              determining the water potential of a cell.

      12.2.2 Role of Macro- and Micro-nutrients
      Essential elements perform several functions. They participate in various
      metabolic processes in the plant cells such as permeability of cell




                                                                         2017-18
     MINERAL NUTRITION                                                            197


membrane, maintenance of osmotic concentration of cell sap, electron-
transport systems, buffering action, enzymatic activity and act as major
constituents of macromolecules and co-enzymes.
    Various forms and functions of essential nutrient elements are given
below.
Nitrogen : This is the essential nutrient element required by plants in the
greatest amount. It is absorbed mainly as NO3– though some are also taken
up as NO2– or NH4+. Nitrogen is required by all parts of a plant, particularly
the meristematic tissues and the metabolically active cells. Nitrogen is one of
the major constituents of proteins, nucleic acids, vitamins and hormones.
Phosphorus: Phosphorus is absorbed by the plants from soil in the form
of phosphate ions (either as H2 PO−4 or HPO2−     4
                                                    ). Phosphorus is a
constituent of cell membranes, certain proteins, all nucleic acids and
nucleotides, and is required for all phosphorylation reactions.

Potassium: It is absorbed as potassium ion (K+). In plants, this is required
in more abundant quantities in the meristematic tissues, buds, leaves
and root tips. Potassium helps to maintain an anion-cation balance in
cells and is involved in protein synthesis, opening and closing of stomata,
activation of enzymes and in the maintenance of the turgidity of cells.
Calcium: Plant absorbs calcium from the soil in the form of calcium ions
(Ca2+). Calcium is required by meristematic and differentiating tissues.
During cell division it is used in the synthesis of cell wall, particularly as
calcium pectate in the middle lamella. It is also needed during the
formation of mitotic spindle. It accumulates in older leaves. It is involved
in the normal functioning of the cell membranes. It activates certain
enzymes and plays an important role in regulating metabolic activities.

Magnesium: It is absorbed by plants in the form of divalent Mg2+. It
activates the enzymes of respiration, photosynthesis and are involved in
the synthesis of DNA and RNA. Magnesium is a constituent of the ring
structure of chlorophyll and helps to maintain the ribosome structure.
Sulphur: Plants obtain sulphur in the form of sulphate (SO2−4 )
                                                                . Sulphur is
present in two amino acids – cysteine and methionine and is the main
constituent of several coenzymes, vitamins (thiamine, biotin, Coenzyme A)
and ferredoxin.

Iron: Plants obtain iron in the form of ferric ions (Fe3+). It is required in
larger amounts in comparison to other micronutrients. It is an important
constituent of proteins involved in the transfer of electrons like ferredoxin
and cytochromes. It is reversibly oxidised from Fe2+ to Fe3+ during electron
transfer. It activates catalase enzyme, and is essential for the formation of
chlorophyll.




                                                                                  2017-18
198                                                                        BIOLOGY


      Manganese: It is absorbed in the form of manganous ions (Mn2+). It
      activates many enzymes involved in photosynthesis, respiration and
      nitrogen metabolism. The best defined function of manganese is in the
      splitting of water to liberate oxygen during photosynthesis.
      Zinc: Plants obtain zinc as Zn2+ ions. It activates various enzymes,
      especially carboxylases. It is also needed in the synthesis of auxin.
      Copper: It is absorbed as cupric ions (Cu2+). It is essential for the overall
      metabolism in plants. Like iron, it is associated with certain enzymes
      involved in redox reactions and is reversibly oxidised from Cu+ to Cu2+.
      Boron : It is absorbed as BO3−  3
                                         or B 4O2−
                                                7
                                                   . Boron is required for uptake
                             2+
      and utilisation of Ca , membrane functioning, pollen germination, cell
      elongation, cell differentiation and carbohydrate translocation.
      Molybdenum : Plants obtain it in the form of molybdate ions ( MoO2+
                                                                       2 )
                                                                           . It
      is a component of several enzymes, including nitrogenase and nitrate
      reductase both of which participate in nitrogen metabolism.
      Chlorine : It is absorbed in the form of chloride anion (Cl–). Along with
      Na+ and K+, it helps in determining the solute concentration and the anion-
      cation balance in cells. It is essential for the water-splitting reaction in
      photosynthesis, a reaction that leads to oxygen evolution.

      12.2.3 Deficiency Symptoms of Essential Elements
      Whenever the supply of an essential element becomes limited, plant growth
      is retarded. The concentration of the essential element below which plant
      growth is retarded is termed as critical concentration. The element is
      said to be deficient when present below the critical concentration.
           Since each element has one or more specific structural or functional
      role in plants, in the absence of any particular element, plants show certain
      morphological changes. These morphological changes are indicative of
      certain element deficiencies and are called deficiency symptoms. The
      deficiency symptoms vary from element to element and they disappear
      when the deficient mineral nutrient is provided to the plant. However, if
      deprivation continues, it may eventually lead to the death of the plant. The
      parts of the plants that show the deficiency symptoms also depend on the
      mobility of the element in the plant. For elements that are actively mobilised
      within the plants and exported to young developing tissues, the deficiency
      symptoms tend to appear first in the older tissues. For example, the
      deficiency symptoms of nitrogen, potassium and magnesium are visible
      first in the senescent leaves. In the older leaves, biomolecules containing
      these elements are broken down, making these elements available for
      mobilising to younger leaves.
           The deficiency symptoms tend to appear first in the young tissues
      whenever the elements are relatively immobile and are not transported
      out of the mature organs, for example, element like sulphur and




                                                                           2017-18
     MINERAL NUTRITION                                                             199


calcium are a part of the structural component of the cell and hence are
not easily released. This aspect of mineral nutrition of plants is of a great
significance and importance to agriculture and horticulture.
    The kind of deficiency symptoms shown in plants include chlorosis,
necrosis, stunted plant growth, premature fall of leaves and buds, and
inhibition of cell division. Chlorosis is the loss of chlorophyll leading to
yellowing in leaves. This symptom is caused by the deficiency of elements
N, K, Mg, S, Fe, Mn, Zn and Mo. Likewise, necrosis, or death of tissue,
particularly leaf tissue, is due to the deficiency of Ca, Mg, Cu, K. Lack or
low level of N, K, S, Mo causes an inhibition of cell division. Some elements
like N, S, Mo delay flowering if their concentration in plants is low.
    You can see from the above that the deficiency of any element can
cause multiple symptoms and that the same symptoms may be caused
by the deficiency of one of several different elements. Hence, to identify
the deficient element, one has to study all the symptoms developed in all
the various parts of the plant and compare them with the available
standard tables. We must also be aware that different plants also respond
differently to the deficiency of the same element.

12.2.4 Toxicity of Micronutrients
The requirement of micronutrients is always in low amounts while their
moderate decrease causes the deficiency symptoms and a moderate increase
causes toxicity. In other words, there is a narrow range of concentration at
which the elements are optimum. Any mineral ion concentration in tissues
that reduces the dry weight of tissues by about 10 per cent is considered
toxic. Such critical concentrations vary widely among different
micronutrients. The toxicity symptoms are difficult to identify. Toxicity levels
for any element also vary for different plants. Many a times, excess of an
element may inhibit the uptake of another element. For example, the
prominent symptom of manganese toxicity is the appearance of brown
spots surrounded by chlorotic veins. It is important to know that
manganese competes with iron and magnesium for uptake and with
magnesium for binding with enzymes. Manganese also inhibit calcium
translocation in shoot apex. Therefore, excess of manganese may, in fact,
induce deficiencies of iron, magnesium and calcium. Thus, what appears
as symptoms of manganese toxicity may actually be the deficiency
symptoms of iron, magnesium and calcium. Can this knowledge be of some
importance to a farmer? a gardener? or even for you in your kitchen-garden?

12.3 MECHANISM           OF   ABSORPTION    OF   ELEMENTS
Much of the studies on mechanism of absorption of elements by plants
has been carried out in isolated cells, tissues or organs. These studies




                                                                                   2017-18
200                                                                      BIOLOGY


      revealed that the process of absorption can be demarcated into two main
      phases. In the first phase, an initial rapid uptake of ions into the ‘free
      space’ or ‘outer space’ of cells – the apoplast, is passive. In the second
      phase of uptake, the ions are taken in slowly into the ‘inner space’ – the
      symplast of the cells. The passive movement of ions into the apoplast
      usually occurs through ion-channels, the trans-membrane proteins that
      function as selective pores. On the other hand, the entry or exit of ions to
      and from the symplast requires the expenditure of metabolic energy, which
      is an active process. The movement of ions is usually called flux; the
      inward movement into the cells is influx and the outward movement, efflux.
      You have read the aspects of mineral nutrient uptake and translocation
      in plants in Chapter 11.

      12.4 TRANSLOCATION           OF   SOLUTES
      Mineral salts are translocated through xylem along with the ascending
      stream of water, which is pulled up through the plant by transpirational
      pull. Analysis of xylem sap shows the presence of mineral salts in it. Use
      of radioisotopes of mineral elements also substantiate the view that they
      are transported through the xylem. You have already discussed the
      movement of water in xylem in Chapter 11.

      12.5 SOIL      AS   RESERVOIR     OF   ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
      Majority of the nutrients that are essential for the growth and
      development of plants become available to the roots due to weathering
      and breakdown of rocks. These processes enrich the soil with dissolved
      ions and inorganic salts. Since they are derived from the rock minerals,
      their role in plant nutrition is referred to as mineral nutrition. Soil
      consists of a wide variety of substances. Soil not only supplies minerals
      but also harbours nitrogen-fixing bacteria, other microbes, holds water,
      supplies air to the roots and acts as a matrix that stabilises the plant.
      Since deficiency of essential minerals affect the crop-yield, there is often
      a need for supplying them through fertilisers. Both macro-nutrients
      (N, P, K, S, etc.) and micro-nutrients (Cu, Zn, Fe, Mn, etc.) form
      components of fertilisers and are applied as per need.

      12.6 METABOLISM         OF   NITROGEN
      12.6.1 Nitrogen Cycle
      Apart from carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, nitrogen is the most
      prevalent element in living organisms. Nitrogen is a constituent of
      amino acids, proteins, hormones, chlorophylls and many of the
      vitamins. Plants compete with microbes for the limited nitrogen that




                                                                         2017-18
      MINERAL NUTRITION                                                                      201


is available in soil. Thus, nitrogen is
a limiting nutrient for both natural
and agricultural eco-systems.
Nitrogen exists as two nitrogen atoms
joined by a very strong triple covalent
bond (N ≡ N). The process of
c o n v e r s i o n o f n i t r o g e n ( N2) t o
ammonia is termed as nitrogen-
fixation. In nature, lightning and
ultraviolet radiation provide enough
energy to convert nitrogen to nitrogen
oxides (NO, NO 2, N 2O). Industrial
combustions, forest fires, automobile
e x h a u s t s a n d p o w e r -generating
stations are also sources of
atmospheric nitrogen oxides.
Decomposition of organic nitrogen of
dead plants and animals into
ammonia is called ammonification.
Some of this ammonia volatilises and
re-enters the atmosphere but most of                Figure 12.3   The nitrogen cycle showing
it is converted into nitrate by soil                              relationship between the three
                                                                  main nitrogen pools – atmospheric
bacteria in the following steps:
                                                                  soil, and biomass


 2NH3 + 3O2 → 2 NO2− + 2H + + 2H2 O                                 .... (i)

 2NO 2− + O2 → 2NO3−                                              ...... (ii)

Ammonia is first oxidised to nitrite by the bacteria Nitrosomonas and/or
Nitrococcus. The nitrite is further oxidised to nitrate with the help of the
bacterium Nitrobacter. These steps are called nitrification (Figure 12.3).
These nitrifying bacteria are chemoautotrophs.
    The nitrate thus formed is absorbed by plants and is transported to
the leaves. In leaves, it is reduced to form ammonia that finally forms the
amine group of amino acids. Nitrate present in the soil is also reduced to
nitrogen by the process of denitrification. Denitrification is carried by
bacteria Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus.

12.6.2 Biological Nitrogen Fixation
Very few living organisms can utilise the nitrogen in the form N2, available
abundantly in the air. Only certain prokaryotic species are capable of
fixing nitrogen. Reduction of nitrogen to ammonia by living organisms is




                                                                                              2017-18
202                                                                        BIOLOGY


      called biological nitrogen fixation. The enzyme, nitrogenase which is
      capable of nitrogen reduction is present exclusively in prokaryotes. Such
      microbes are called N2- fixers.

                                     Nitrogenase
                              N ≡ N → NH3

      The nitrogen-fixing microbes could be free-living or symbiotic. Examples
      of free-living nitrogen-fixing aerobic microbes are Azotobacter and
      Beijernickia while Rhodospirillum is anaerobic and Bacillus free-living.
      In addition, a number of cyanobacteria such as Anabaena and Nostoc
      are also free-living nitrogen-fixers.
      Symbiotic biological nitrogen fixation
      Several types of symbiotic biological nitrogen fixing associations are known.
      The most prominent among them is the legume-bacteria relationship.
      Species of rod-shaped Rhizobium has such relationship with the roots of
      several legumes such as alfalfa, sweet clover, sweet pea, lentils, garden pea,
      broad bean, clover beans, etc. The most common association on roots is
      as nodules. These nodules are small outgrowths on the roots. The microbe,
      Frankia, also produces nitrogen-fixing nodules on the roots of non-
      leguminous plants (e.g., Alnus). Both Rhizobium and Frankia are free-
      living in soil, but as symbionts, can fix atmospheric nitrogen.
           Uproot any one plant of a common pulse, just before flowering. You
      will see near-spherical outgrowths on the roots. These are nodules. If
      you cut through them you will notice that the central portion is red or
      pink. What makes the nodules pink? This is due to the presence of
      leguminous haemoglobin or leg-haemoglobin.

      Nodule Formation
      Nodule formation involves a sequence of multiple interactions between
      Rhizobium and roots of the host plant. Principal stages in the nodule
      formation are summarised as follows:
      Rhizobia multiply and colonise the surroundings of roots and get attached
      to epidermal and root hair cells. The root-hairs curl and the bacteria invade
      the root-hair. An infection thread is produced carrying the bacteria into
      the cortex of the root, where they initiate the nodule formation in the cortex
      of the root. Then the bacteria are released from the thread into the cells
      which leads to the differentiation of specialised nitrogen fixing cells. The
      nodule thus formed, establishes a direct vascular connection with the host
      for exchange of nutrients. These events are depicted in Figure 12.4.
          The nodule contains all the necessary biochemical components, such
      as the enzyme nitrogenase and leghaemoglobin. The enzyme nitrogenase
      is a Mo-Fe protein and catalyses the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen
      to ammonia, (Figure 12.5) the first stable product of nitrogen fixation.




                                                                           2017-18
     MINERAL NUTRITION                                                                                         203



                     Soil                           Hook
                   particles

                         Root hair
                                                                                  Infection
                                                                                   thread
                         Bacteria                                                containing
                                                                                  bacteria
                                              Bacteria         Inner cortex and                      Mature nodule
      (a)
                                                                pericycle cells
                                                                under division

        Figure 12.4 Development of root nodules in soyabean : (a) Rhizobium bacteria
                    contact a susceptible root hair, divide near it, (b) Successful infection
                    of the root hair causes it to curl, (c) Infected thread carries the bacteria
                    to the inner cortex. The bacteria get modified into rod-shaped
                    bacteroids and cause inner cortical and pericycle cells to divide.
                    Division and growth of cortical and pericycle cells lead to nodule
                    formation, (d) A mature nodule is complete with vascular tissues
                    continuous with those of the root


The reaction is as follows:

            N2 + 8e – + 8H+ + 16ATP → 2NH3 + H2 + 16ADP + 16Pi

    The enzyme nitrogenase is highly sensitive to the molecular oxygen; it
requires anaerobic conditions. The nodules have adaptations that ensure
that the enzyme is protected from oxygen. To protect these enzymes, the
nodule contains an oxygen scavenger called leg-haemoglobin. It is interesting
to note that these microbes live as aerobes under free-living conditions (where
nitrogenase is not operational), but during nitrogen-fixing events, they become
anaerobic (thus protecting the nitrogenase enzyme). You must have noticed
in the above reaction that the ammonia synthesis by nitrogenease requires a

        Substrate                                                              Product
                                                                                            H
   [nitrogen gas (N2)]                                                      [ammonia (NH3)]
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                          H
             N                                                                               H        H    N
             N                                                       Reduction                                 H
                                                                                     H                 H
                                                           H                     H
                  N         Reduction H   N      Reduction H     N               H       N                 Release
                  N                  H    N                H     N               H       N                 of products
                                                           H                     H
                                                                                     H
   Enzyme        Binding +2 H                       +2 H                +2 H
(nitrogenase) of substrate                                                        Free nitrogenase
                                                                                  can bind another
                                                                                   molecule of N2

       Figure 12.5 Steps of conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia by nitrogenase
                   enzyme complex found in nitrogen-fixing bacteria




                                                                                                                2017-18
204                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      very high input of energy (8 ATP for each NH3 produced). The energy required,
                      thus, is obtained from the respiration of the host cells.
                      Fate of ammonia: At physiological pH, the ammonia is protonated to form
                      NH+4 (ammonium) ion. While most of the plants can assimilate nitrate as well
                      as ammonium ions, the latter is quite toxic to plants and hence cannot
                      accumulate in them. Let us now see how the NH+4 is used to synthesise
                      amino acids in plants. There are two main ways in which this can take place:
                      (i) Reductive amination : In these processes, ammonia reacts with
                          α-ketoglutaric acid and forms glutamic acid as indicated in the
                          equation given below :
                                                      Glutamate
              α − ketoglutaric acid + NH4+ + NADPH       → glutamate + H2 O + NADP
                                                    Dehydrogenase

                      (ii) Transamination : It involves the transfer of amino group from one
                           amino acid to the keto group of a keto acid. Glutamic acid is the main
                           amino acid from which the transfer of NH2, the amino group takes
                           place and other amino acids are formed through transamination. The
                           enzyme transaminase catalyses all such reactions. For example,




                      The two most important amides – asparagine and glutamine – found in
                      plants are a structural part of proteins. They are formed from two amino
                      acids, namely aspartic acid and glutamic acid, respectively, by addition
                      of another amino group to each. The hydroxyl part of the acid is replaced
                      by another NH2– radicle. Since amides contain more nitrogen than the
                      amino acids, they are transported to other parts of the plant via xylem
                      vessels. In addition, along with the transpiration stream the nodules of
                      some plants (e.g., soyabean) export the fixed nitrogen as ureides. These
                      compounds also have a particularly high nitrogen to carbon ratio.



                                            SUMMARY

      Plants obtain their inorganic nutrients from air, water and soil. Plants absorb a
      wide variety of mineral elements. Not all the mineral elements that they absorb are
      required by plants. Out of the more than 105 elements discovered so far, less than
      21 are essential and beneficial for normal plant growth and development. The
      elements required in large quantities are called macronutrients while those required
      in less quantities or in trace are termed as micronutrients. These elements are
      either essential constituents of proteins, carbohydrates, fats, nucleic acid etc.,




                                                                                          2017-18
MINERAL NUTRITION                                                                           205


  and/or take part in various metabolic processes. Deficiency of each of these
  essential elements may lead to symptoms called deficiency symptoms. Chlorosis,
  necrosis, stunted growth, impaired cell division, etc., are some prominent deficiency
  symptoms. Plants absorb minerals through roots by either passive or active
  processes. They are carried to all parts of the organism through xylem along with
  water transport.
       Nitrogen is very essential for the sustenance of life. Plants cannot use
  atmospheric nitrogen directly. But some of the plants in association with N2-fixing
  bacteria, especially roots of legumes, can fix this atmospheric nitrogen into
  biologically usable forms. Nitrogen fixation requires a strong reducing agent and
  energy in the form of ATP. N2-fixation is accomplished with the help of nitrogen-
  fixing microbes, mainly Rhizobium. The enzyme nitrogenase which plays an
  important role in biological N2 fixation is very sensitive to oxygen. Most of the
  processes take place in anaerobic environment. The energy, ATP, required is
  provided by the respiration of the host cells. Ammonia produced following N2 fixation
  is incorporated into amino acids as the amino group.



                                          EXERCISES

   1. ‘All elements that are present in a plant need not be essential to its survival’.
      Comment.
   2. Why is purification of water and nutrient salts so important in studies involving
      mineral nutrition using hydroponics?
   3. Explain with examples: macronutrients, micronutrients, beneficial nutrients,
      toxic elements and essential elements.
   4. Name at least five different deficiency symptoms in plants. Describe them and
      correlate them with the concerned mineral deficiency.
   5. If a plant shows a symptom which could develop due to deficiency of more than
      one nutrient, how would you find out experimentally, the real deficient mineral
      element?
   6. Why is that in certain plants deficiency symptoms appear first in younger parts
      of the plant while in others they do so in mature organs?
   7. How are the minerals absorbed by the plants?
   8. What are the conditions necessary for fixation of atmospheric nitrogen by
      Rhizobium. What is their role in N2-fixation?
   9. What are the steps involved in formation of a root nodule?
  10. Which of the following statements are true? If false, correct them:
       (a)   Boron deficiency leads to stout axis.
       (b)   Every mineral element that is present in a cell is needed by the cell.
       (c)   Nitrogen as a nutrient element, is highly immobile in the plants.
       (d)   It is very easy to establish the essentiality of micronutrients because they
             are required only in trace quantities.




                                                                                            2017-18
 268                                                                                        BIOLOGY




                          CHAPTER 17
                          BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
17.1 Respiratory     As you have read earlier, oxygen (O2) is utilised by the organisms to
     Organs          indirectly break down nutrient molecules like glucose and to derive energy
                     for performing various activities. Carbon dioxide (CO2) which is harmful
17.2 Mechanism of
                     is also released during the above catabolic reactions. It is, therefore, evident
     Breathing
                     that O2 has to be continuously provided to the cells and CO2 produced
17.3 Exchange of     by the cells have to be released out. This process of exchange of O2 from
     Gases           the atmosphere with CO2 produced by the cells is called breathing,
17.4 Transport of    commonly known as respiration. Place your hands on your chest; you
     Gases           can feel the chest moving up and down. You know that it is due to
                     breathing. How do we breathe? The respiratory organs and the mechanism
17.5 Regulation of   of breathing are described in the following sections of this chapter.
     Respiration
17.6 Disorders of    17.1 RESPIRATORY ORGANS
     Respiratory
     System          Mechanisms of breathing vary among different groups of animals
                     depending mainly on their habitats and levels of organisation. Lower
                     invertebrates like sponges, coelenterates, flatworms, etc., exchange O2
                     with CO2 by simple diffusion over their entire body surface. Earthworms
                     use their moist cuticle and insects have a network of tubes (tracheal
                     tubes) to transport atmospheric air within the body. Special vascularised
                     structures called gills are used by most of the aquatic arthropods and
                     molluscs whereas vascularised bags called lungs are used by the
                     terrestrial forms for the exchange of gases. Among vertebrates, fishes
                     use gills whereas reptiles, birds and mammals respire through lungs.
                     Amphibians like frogs can respire through their moist skin also.
                     Mammals have a well developed respiratory system.
    BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES                                                         269


17.1.1 Human Respiratory System
We have a pair of external nostrils opening out above the upper lips.
It leads to a nasal chamber through the nasal passage. The nasal
chamber opens into the pharynx, a portion of which is the common
passage for food and air. The pharynx opens through the larynx region
into the trachea. Larynx is a cartilaginous box which helps in sound
production and hence called the sound box. During swallowing glottis
can be covered by a thin elastic cartilaginous flap called epiglottis to
prevent the entry of food into the larynx. Trachea is a straight tube
extending up to the mid-thoracic cavity, which divides at the level of
5th thoracic vertebra into a right and left primary bronchi. Each bronchi
undergoes repeated divisions to form the secondary and tertiary bronchi
and bronchioles ending up in very thin terminal bronchioles. The
tracheae, primary, secondary and tertiary bronchi, and initial
bronchioles are supported by incomplete cartilaginous rings. Each
terminal bronchiole gives rise to a number of very thin, irregular-walled
and vascularised bag-like structures called alveoli. The branching
network of bronchi, bronchioles and alveoli comprise the lungs (Figure
17.1). We have two lungs which are covered by a double layered pleura,
with pleural fluid between them. It reduces friction on the lung-surface.
The outer pleural membrane is in close contact with the thoracic


                                                                            Epiglottis

                                                                            Larynx

                                                                            Trachea




                    Bronchus




                Cut end of rib                                              Pleural membranes
                                                  heart
                                                                            Alveoli
                                                                            Pleural fluid
                          Lung
                                                                            Bronchiole
                                               Diaphragm



             Figure 17.1    Diagrammatic view of human respiratory system (Sectional view of
                            the left lung is also shown)
270                                                                       BIOLOGY


      lining whereas the inner pleural membrane is in contact with the lung
      surface. The part starting with the external nostrils up to the terminal
      bronchioles constitute the conducting part whereas the alveoli and their
      ducts form the respiratory or exchange part of the respiratory system.
      The conducting part transports the atmospheric air to the alveoli, clears
      it from foreign particles, humidifies and also brings the air to body
      temperature. Exchange part is the site of actual diffusion of O2 and CO2
      between blood and atmospheric air.
           The lungs are situated in the thoracic chamber which is anatomically
      an air-tight chamber. The thoracic chamber is formed dorsally by the
      vertebral column, ventrally by the sternum, laterally by the ribs and on
      the lower side by the dome-shaped diaphragm. The anatomical setup of
      lungs in thorax is such that any change in the volume of the thoracic
      cavity will be reflected in the lung (pulmonary) cavity. Such an
      arrangement is essential for breathing, as we cannot directly alter the
      pulmonary volume.

           Respiration involves the following steps:
            (i) Breathing or pulmonary ventilation by which atmospheric air
                is drawn in and CO2 rich alveolar air is released out.
           (ii) Diffusion of gases (O2 and CO2) across alveolar membrane.
          (iii) Transport of gases by the blood.
           (iv) Diffusion of O2 and CO2 between blood and tissues.
           (v) Utilisation of O2 by the cells for catabolic reactions and resultant
               release of CO2 (cellular respiration as dealt in the Chapter 14).


      17.2 MECHANISM         OF   BREATHING

      Breathing involves two stages : inspiration during which atmospheric
      air is drawn in and expiration by which the alveolar air is released out.
      The movement of air into and out of the lungs is carried out by creating a
      pressure gradient between the lungs and the atmosphere. Inspiration
      can occur if the pressure within the lungs (intra-pulmonary pressure) is
      less than the atmospheric pressure, i.e., there is a negative pressure in
      the lungs with respect to atmospheric pressure. Similarly, expiration takes
      place when the intra-pulmonary pressure is higher than the atmospheric
      pressure. The diaphragm and a specialised set of muscles – external and
      internal intercostals between the ribs, help in generation of such gradients.
      Inspiration is initiated by the contraction of diaphragm which increases
      the volume of thoracic chamber in the antero-posterior axis. The
      contraction of external inter-costal muscles lifts up the ribs and the
     BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES                                                     271


sternum causing an increase in the volume of
the thoracic chamber in the dorso-ventral axis.
The overall increase in the thoracic volume
causes a similar increase in pulmonary
volume. An increase in pulmonary volume
decreases the intra-pulmonary pressure to less
than the atmospheric pressure which forces
the air from outside to move into the lungs,
i.e., inspiration (Figure 17.2a). Relaxation of
the diaphragm and the inter-costal muscles
returns the diaphragm and sternum to their
normal positions and reduce the thoracic
volume and thereby the pulmonary volume.
This leads to an increase in intra-pulmonary
pressure to slightly above the atmospheric
pressure causing the expulsion of air from the
lungs, i.e., expiration (Figure 17.2b). We have
the ability to increase the strength of
inspiration and expiration with the help of
additional muscles in the abdomen. On an
average, a healthy human breathes 12-16
times/minute. The volume of air involved in
breathing movements can be estimated by
using a spirometer which helps in clinical
assessment of pulmonary functions.

17.2.1 Respiratory Volumes and
       Capacities

Tidal Volume (TV): Volume of air inspired or
expired during a normal respiration. It is
approx. 500 mL., i.e., a healthy man can
inspire or expire approximately 6000 to 8000
mL of air per minute.                             Figure 17.2 Mechanism of breathing showing :
Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV):                             (a) inspiration (b) expiration
Additional volume of air, a person can inspire
by a forcible inspiration. This averages 2500
mL to 3000 mL.
Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV):
Additional volume of air, a person can expire
by a forcible expiration. This averages 1000
mL to 1100 mL.
 272                                                                                   BIOLOGY


                     Residual Volume (RV): Volume of air remaining in the lungs even after a
                     forcible expiration. This averages 1100 mL to 1200 mL.
                         By adding up a few respiratory volumes described above, one can
                     derive various pulmonary capacities, which can be used in clinical
                     diagnosis.
                     Inspiratory Capacity (IC): Total volume of air a person can inspire after
                     a normal expiration. This includes tidal volume and inspiratory reserve
                     volume ( TV+IRV).
                     Expiratory Capacity (EC): Total volume of air a person can expire after
                     a normal inspiration. This includes tidal volume and expiratory reserve
                     volume (TV+ERV).
                     Functional Residual Capacity (FRC): Volume of air that will remain in
                     the lungs after a normal expiration. This includes ERV+RV.
                     Vital Capacity (VC): The maximum volume of air a person can breathe in
                     after a forced expiration. This includes ERV, TV and IRV or the maximum
                     volume of air a person can breathe out after a forced inspiration.
                     Total Lung Capacity: Total volume of air accommodated in the lungs at
                     the end of a forced inspiration. This includes RV, ERV, TV and IRV or
                     vital capacity + residual volume.

                     17.3 EXCHANGE        OF   GASES

                     Alveoli are the primary sites of exchange of gases. Exchange of gases also
                     occur between blood and tissues. O2 and CO2 are exchanged in these
                     sites by simple diffusion mainly based on pressure/concentration
                     gradient. Solubility of the gases as well as the thickness of the membranes
                     involved in diffusion are also some important factors that can affect the
                     rate of diffusion.
                         Pressure contributed by an individual gas in a mixture of gases is
                     called partial pressure and is represented as pO2 for oxygen and pCO2 for
                     carbon dioxide. Partial pressures of these two gases in the atmospheric
                     air and the two sites of diffusion are given in Table 17.1 and in
                     Figure 17.3. The data given in the table clearly indicates a concentration
                     gradient for oxygen from alveoli to blood and blood to tissues. Similarly,
    TABLE 17.1 Partial Pressures (in mm Hg) of Oxygen and Carbon dioxide at Different
                Parts Involved in Diffusion in Comparison to those in Atmosphere

Respiratory   Atmospheric       Alveoli            Blood                Blood         Tissues
   Gas            Air                          (Deoxygenated)        (Oxygenated)

   O2             159            104                   40                  95            40

   CO2            0.3             40                   45                  40            45
     BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES                                                                   273




       Figure 17.3     Diagrammatic representation of exchange of gases at the alveolus and
                       the body tissues with blood and transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide


a gradient is present for CO2 in the opposite
direction, i.e., from tissues to blood and
blood to alveoli. As the solubility of CO2 is
20-25 times higher than that of O2, the                            Air
amount of CO2 that can diffuse through the
diffusion membrane per unit difference in            Alveolar wall                             Basement
partial pressure is much higher compared           (one-celled thick)                          substance
to that of O2. The diffusion membrane is
                                                                         Alveolar cavity
made up of three major layers (Figure 17.4)
namely, the thin squamous epithelium of
alveoli, the endothelium of alveolar capillaries
and the basement substance in between                        Blood
                                                            capillary                      Red blood
them. However, its total thickness is much                                                    cell
less than a millimetre. Therefore, all the
factors in our body are favourable for               Figure 17.4        A Diagram of a section of an
                                                                        alveolus with a pulmonary
diffusion of O2 from alveoli to tissues and that                        capillary.
of CO2 from tissues to alveoli.
                      274                                                                                                                  BIOLOGY


                                                                       17.4 TRANSPORT         OF   GASES
                                                                       Blood is the medium of transport for O2 and CO2. About 97 per cent of O2 is
                                                                       transported by RBCs in the blood. The remaining 3 per cent of O2 is carried
                                                                       in a dissolved state through the plasma. Nearly 20-25 per cent of CO2 is
                                                                       transported by RBCs whereas 70 per cent of it is carried as bicarbonate.
                                                                       About 7 per cent of CO2 is carried in a dissolved state through plasma.

                                                                       17.4.1 Transport of Oxygen
                                                                         Haemoglobin is a red coloured iron containing pigment present in the
                                                                         RBCs. O2 can bind with haemoglobin in a reversible manner to form
                                                                         oxyhaemoglobin. Each haemoglobin molecule can carry a maximum of
                                                                         four molecules of O2. Binding of oxygen with haemoglobin is primarily
                                                                         related to partial pressure of O2. Partial pressure of CO2, hydrogen ion
                                                                         concentration and temperature are the other factors which can interfere
                                                                         with this binding. A sigmoid curve is obtained when percentage saturation
                                                                                                      of haemoglobin with O2 is plotted against the
                                                                                                      pO 2 . This curve is called the Oxygen
Percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen




                                                                                                      dissociation curve (Figure 17.5) and is highly
                                                                                                      useful in studying the effect of factors like
                                                   100                                                pCO2, H+ concentration, etc., on binding of O2
                                                                                                      with haemoglobin. In the alveoli, where there
                                                    80                                                is high pO2, low pCO2, lesser H+ concentration
                                                                                                      and lower temperature, the factors are
                                                                                                      all favourable for the formation of
                                                    60
                                                                                                      oxyhaemoglobin, whereas in the tissues,
                                                                                                      where low pO 2 , high pCO 2 , high H +
                                                    40
                                                                                                      concentration and higher temperature exist,
                                                                                                      the conditions are favourable for dissociation
                                                    20                                                of oxygen from the oxyhaemoglobin. This
                                                                                                      clearly indicates that O 2 gets bound to
                                                      0     20      40      60      80    100         haemoglobin in the lung surface and gets
                                                                                                      dissociated at the tissues. Every 100 ml of
                                                            Partial pressure of oxygen (mm Hg)
                                                                                                      oxygenated blood can deliver around 5 ml of
                                                    Figure 17.5 Oxygen dissociation curve             O2 to the tissues under normal physiological
                                                                                                      conditions.

                                                                       17.4.2 Transport of Carbon dioxide
                                                                       CO2 is carried by haemoglobin as carbamino-haemoglobin (about
                                                                       20-25 per cent). This binding is related to the partial pressure of CO2.
                                                                       pO2 is a major factor which could affect this binding. When pCO2 is high
                                                                       and pO2 is low as in the tissues, more binding of carbon dioxide occurs
                                                                       whereas, when the pCO2 is low and pO2 is high as in the alveoli, dissociation
     BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES                                           275


of CO2 from carbamino-haemoglobin takes place, i.e., CO2 which is bound
to haemoglobin from the tissues is delivered at the alveoli. RBCs contain
a very high concentration of the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase and minute
quantities of the same is present in the plasma too. This enzyme facilitates
the following reaction in both directions.

                     Carbonic               Carbonic
                     anhydrase              anhydrase
                  
       CO2 + H2 O ← 
                         → H2 CO3 ←
                                   → HCO3− + H +
                                    

    At the tissue site where partial pressure of CO2 is high due to
catabolism, CO2 diffuses into blood (RBCs and plasma) and forms HCO3–
and H+,. At the alveolar site where pCO2 is low, the reaction proceeds in
the opposite direction leading to the formation of CO2 and H2O. Thus,
CO2 trapped as bicarbonate at the tissue level and transported to the
alveoli is released out as CO2 (Figure 17.4). Every 100 ml of deoxygenated
blood delivers approximately 4 ml of CO2 to the alveoli.


17.5 REGULATION        OF   RESPIRATION

Human beings have a significant ability to maintain and moderate the
respiratory rhythm to suit the demands of the body tissues. This is done
by the neural system. A specialised centre present in the medulla region
of the brain called respiratory rhythm centre is primarily responsible for
this regulation. Another centre present in the pons region of the brain
called pneumotaxic centre can moderate the functions of the respiratory
rhythm centre. Neural signal from this centre can reduce the duration of
inspiration and thereby alter the respiratory rate. A chemosensitive area
is situated adjacent to the rhythm centre which is highly sensitive to CO2
and hydrogen ions. Increase in these substances can activate this centre,
which in turn can signal the rhythm centre to make necessary adjustments
in the respiratory process by which these substances can be eliminated.
Receptors associated with aortic arch and carotid artery also can recognise
changes in CO2 and H+ concentration and send necessary signals to the
rhythm centre for remedial actions. The role of oxygen in the regulation of
respiratory rhythm is quite insignificant.


17.6 DISORDERS OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

Asthma is a difficulty in breathing causing wheezing due to inflammation
of bronchi and bronchioles.
Emphysema is a chronic disorder in which alveolar walls are damaged
due to which respiratory surface is decreased. One of the major causes of
this is cigarette smoking.
276                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      Occupational Respiratory Disorders: In certain industries, especially
                      those involving grinding or stone-breaking, so much dust is produced
                      that the defense mechanism of the body cannot fully cope with the
                      situation. Long exposure can give rise to inflammation leading to fibrosis
                      (proliferation of fibrous tissues) and thus causing serious lung damage.
                      Workers in such industries should wear protective masks.



                                            SUMMARY

      Cells utilise oxygen for metabolism and produce energy along with substances
      like carbon dioxide which is harmful. Animals have evolved different mechanisms
      for the transport of oxygen to the cells and for the removal of carbon dioxide from
      there. We have a well developed respiratory system comprising two lungs and
      associated air passages to perform this function.
          The first step in respiration is breathing by which atmospheric air is taken in
      (inspiration) and the alveolar air is released out (expiration). Exchange of O2 and
      CO2 between deoxygenated blood and alveoli, transport of these gases throughout
      the body by blood, exchange of O2 and CO2 between the oxygenated blood and
      tissues and utilisation of O2 by the cells (cellular respiration) are the other steps
      involved.
          Inspiration and expiration are carried out by creating pressure gradients
      between the atmosphere and the alveoli with the help of specialised muscles –
      intercostals and diaphragm. Volumes of air involved in these activities can be
      estimated with the help of spirometer and are of clinical significance.
          Exchange of O2 and CO2 at the alveoli and tissues occur by diffusion. Rate of
      diffusion is dependent on the partial pressure gradients of O2 (pO2) and CO2 (pCO2),
      their solubility as well as the thickness of the diffusion surface. These factors in
      our body facilitate diffusion of O2 from the alveoli to the deoxygenated blood as
      well as from the oxygenated blood to the tissues. The factors are favourable for the
      diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direction, i.e., from tissues to alveoli.
          Oxygen is transported mainly as oxyhaemoglobin. In the alveoli where pO2 is
      higher, O2 gets bound to haemoglobin which is easily dissociated at the tissues
      where pO2 is low and pCO2 and H+ concentration are high. Nearly 70 per cent of
      carbon dioxide is transported as bicarbonate (HCO3– ) with the help of the enzyme
      carbonic anhydrase. 20-25 per cent of carbon dioxide is carried by haemoglobin
      as carbamino-haemoglobin. In the tissues where pCO2 is high, it gets bound to
      blood whereas in the alveoli where pCO2 is low and pO2 is high, it gets removed
      from the blood.
          Respiratory rhythm is maintained by the respiratory centre in the medulla
      region of brain. A pneumotaxic centre in the pons region of the brain and a
      chemosensitive area in the medulla can alter respiratory mechanism.
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES                                                             277


                                         EXERCISES

   1. Define vital capacity. What is its significance?
   2. State the volume of air remaining in the lungs after a normal breathing.
   3. Diffusion of gases occurs in the alveolar region only and not in the other parts of
      respiratory system. Why?
   4. What are the major transport mechanisms for CO2? Explain.
   5. What will be the pO2 and pCO2 in the atmospheric air compared to those in the
      alveolar air ?
       (i)     pO2 lesser, pCO2 higher
       (ii)    pO2 higher, pCO2 lesser
       (iii)   pO2 higher, pCO2 higher
      (iv)  pO2 lesser, pCO2 lesser
   6. Explain the process of inspiration under normal conditions.
   7. How is respiration regulated?
   8. What is the effect of pCO2 on oxygen transport?
   9. What happens to the respiratory process in a man going up a hill?
  10. What is the site of gaseous exchange in an insect?
  11. Define oxygen dissociation curve. Can you suggest any reason for its sigmoidal
      pattern?
  12. Have you heard about hypoxia? Try to gather information about it, and discuss
      with your friends.
  13. Distinguish between
      (a) IRV and ERV
      (b) Inspiratory capacity and Expiratory capacity.
      (c) Vital capacity and Total lung capacity.
  14. What is Tidal volume? Find out the Tidal volume (approximate value) for a healthy
      human in an hour.
 330                                                                                      BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 22
                            CHEMICAL COORDINATION
                            AND INTEGRATION


22.1 Endocrine          You have already learnt that the neural system pr ovides a
     Glands and         point-to-point rapid coordination among organs. The neural
     Hormones           coordination is fast but short-lived. As the nerve fibres do not innervate
                        all cells of the body and the cellular functions need to be continuously
22.2 Human
                        regulated; a special kind of coordination and integration has to be
     Endocrine
                        provided. This function is carried out by hormones. The neural system
     System
                        and the endocrine system jointly coordinate and regulate the
22.3 Hormones of        physiological functions in the body.
     Heart, Kidney
     and
                        22.1 ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES
     Gastrointestinal
     Tract
                        Endocrine glands lack ducts and are hence, called ductless glands. Their
22.4 Mechanism of       secretions are called hormones. The classical definition of hormone as a
     Hormone Action     chemical produced by endocrine glands and released into the blood and
                        transported to a distantly located target organ has current scientific
                        definition as follows: Hormones are non-nutrient chemicals which
                        act as intercellular messengers and are produced in trace amounts.
                        The new definition covers a number of new molecules in addition to the
                        hormones secreted by the organised endocrine glands. Invertebrates
                        possess very simple endocrine systems with few hormones whereas a large
                        number of chemicals act as hormones and provide coordination in the
                        vertebrates. The human endocrine system is described here.
    CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                                  331


22.2 HUMAN ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

The endocrine glands and hormone
producing diffused tissues/cells located
in different parts of our body constitute     Hypothalamus                    Pineal
the endocrine system. Pituitary, pineal,
                                                 Pituitary
thyroid, adrenal, pancreas, parathyroid,
thymus and gonads (testis in males and
                                                                                 Thyroid and
ovary in females) are the organised                                              Parathyroid
endocrine bodies in our body
(Figure 22.1). In addition to these, some
                                                                                       Thymus
other organs, e.g., gastrointestinal tract,
liver, kidney, heart also produce
hormones. A brief account of the
structure and functions of all major                                                    Pancreas
endocrine glands and hypothalamus of                                                     Adrenal
the human body is given in the following
sections.

22.2.1     The Hypothalamus
As you know, the hypothalamus is the          Ovary
                                                                                     Testis
                                              (in female)
basal part of diencephalon, forebrain                                                (in male)
(Figure 22.1) and it regulates a wide
spectrum of body functions. It contains
several groups of neurosecretory cells
called nuclei which produce hormones.            Figure 22.1 Location of endocrine glands
These hormones regulate the synthesis
and secretion of pituitary hormones. However, the hormones produced
by hypothalamus are of two types, the releasing hormones (which
stimulate secretion of pituitary hormones) and the inhibiting hormones
(which inhibit secretions of pituitary hormones). For example a
hypothalamic hormone called Gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH)
stimulates the pituitary synthesis and release of gonadotrophins. On the
other hand, somatostatin from the hypothalamus inhibits the release of
growth hormone from the pituitary. These hormones originating in the
hypothalamic neurons, pass through axons and are released from their
nerve endings. These hormones reach the pituitary gland through a portal
circulatory system and regulate the functions of the anterior pituitary.
The posterior pituitary is under the direct neural regulation of the
hypothalamus (Figure 22.2).
332                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                  Hypothalamus                   22.2.2 The Pituitary Gland
                                Hypothalamic      The pituitary gland is located in a bony cavity
                                neurons
                                                  called sella tursica and is attached to
                                                  hypothalamus by a stalk (Figure 22.2). It is
                                                  divided anatomically into an adenohypophysis
                                                  and a neurohypophysis. Adenohypophysis
                                                  consists of two portions, pars distalis and pars
                                                  intermedia. The pars distalis region of pituitary,
                                                  commonly called anterior pituitary, produces
                                                  growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL),
                          Portal circulation      thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH),
                                                  adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
                                                  luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle
                              Posterior           stimulating hormone (FSH). Pars intermedia
                              pituitary
                                                  secretes only one hormone called melanocyte
                                                  stimulating hormone (MSH). However, in
     Anterior                                     humans, the pars intermedia is almost merged
     pituitary                                    with pars distalis. Neurohypophysis (pars
Figure 22.2 Diagrammatic representation of nervosa) also known as posterior pituitary,
              pituitary and its relationship with stores and releases two hormones called
              hypothalamus
                                                  oxytocin and vasopressin, which are actually
                        synthesised by the hypothalamus and are transported axonally to
                        neurohypophysis.
                            Over-secretion of GH stimulates abnormal growth of the body leading
                        to gigantism and low secretion of GH results in stunted growth resulting
                        in pituitary dwarfism. Prolactin regulates the growth of the mammary
                        glands and formation of milk in them. TSH stimulates the synthesis and
                        secretion of thyroid hormones from the thyroid gland. ACTH stimulates
                        the synthesis and secretion of steroid hormones called glucocorticoids
                        from the adrenal cortex. LH and FSH stimulate gonadal activity and hence
                        are called gonadotrophins. In males, LH stimulates the synthesis and
                        secretion of hormones called androgens from testis. In males, FSH and
                        androgens regulate spermatogenesis. In females, LH induces ovulation
                        of fully mature follicles (graafian follicles) and maintains the corpus
                        luteum, formed from the remnants of the graafian follicles after ovulation.
                        FSH stimulates growth and development of the ovarian follicles in females.
                        MSH acts on the melanocytes (melanin containing cells) and regulates
                        pigmentation of the skin. Oxytocin acts on the smooth muscles of our
                        body and stimulates their contraction. In females, it stimulates a vigorous
                        contraction of uterus at the time of child birth, and milk ejection from the
                        mammary gland. Vasopressin acts mainly at the kidney and stimulates
     CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                                  333


resorption of water and electrolytes by the distal tubules
and thereby reduces loss of water through urine
(diuresis). Hence, it is also called as anti-diuretic
hormone (ADH).


22.2.3     The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland is located on the dorsal side of
forebrain. Pineal secretes a hormone called melatonin.
Melatonin plays a very important role in the regulation
of a 24-hour (diurnal) rhythm of our body. For
example, it helps in maintaining the normal rhythms
of sleep-wake cycle, body temperature. In addition,
melatonin also influences metabolism, pigmentation,
the menstrual cycle as well as our defense capability.


22.2.4     Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is composed of two lobes which are
located on either side of the trachea (Figure 22.3). Both
the lobes are interconnected with a thin flap of connective
tissue called isthmus. The thyroid gland is composed
of follicles and stromal tissues. Each thyroid follicle
is composed of follicular cells, enclosing a cavity. These
follicular cells synthesise two hormones,
tetraiodothyronine or thyroxine (T 4 ) and
triiodothyronine (T 3). Iodine is essential for the
normal rate of hormone synthesis in the thyroid.
Deficiency of iodine in our diet results in
hypothyroidism and enlargement of the thyroid gland,
commonly called goitre. Hypothyroidism during
pregnancy causes defective development and
maturation of the growing baby leading to stunted
growth (cretinism), mental retardation, low intelligence
quotient, abnormal skin, deaf-mutism, etc. In adult
women, hypothyroidism may cause menstrual cycle
                                                              Figure 22.3 Diagrammatic view of the
to become irregular. Due to cancer of the thyroid gland
                                                                          position of Thyroid and
or due to development of nodules of the thyroid glands,                   Parathyroid
the rate of synthesis and secretion of the thyroid                        (a) Ventral side
hormones is increased to abnormal high levels leading                     (b) Dorsal side
to a condition called hyperthyroidism which adversely
affects the body physiology.
334                                                                     BIOLOGY


           Thyroid hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal
      metabolic rate. These hormones also support the process of red blood
      cell formation. Thyroid hormones control the metabolism of carbohydrates,
      proteins and fats. Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is also
      influenced by thyroid hormones. Thyroid gland also secretes a protein
      hormone called thyrocalcitonin (TCT) which regulates the blood calcium
      levels.


      22.2.5 Parathyroid Gland
      In humans, four parathyroid glands are present on the back side of the
      thyroid gland, one pair each in the two lobes of the thyroid gland (Figure
      22.3b). The parathyroid glands secrete a peptide hormone called
      parathyroid hormone (PTH). The secretion of PTH is regulated by the
      circulating levels of calcium ions.
          Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases the Ca2+ levels in the blood. PTH
      acts on bones and stimulates the process of bone resorption (dissolution/
      demineralisation). PTH also stimulates reabsorption of Ca2+ by the renal
      tubules and increases Ca2+ absorption from the digested food. It is, thus,
      clear that PTH is a hypercalcemic hormone, i.e., it increases the blood
      Ca2+ levels. Along with TCT, it plays a significant role in calcium balance
      in the body.


      22.2.6 Thymus
      The thymus gland is a lobular structure located between lungs behind
      sternum on the ventral side of aorta. The thymus plays a major role in
      the development of the immune system. This gland secretes the peptide
      hormones called thymosins. Thymosins play a major role in the
      differentiation of T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated
      immunity. In addition, thymosins also promote production of antibodies
      to provide humoral immunity. Thymus is degenerated in old individuals
      resulting in a decreased production of thymosins. As a result, the immune
      responses of old persons become weak.


      22.2.7 Adrenal Gland
      Our body has one pair of adrenal glands, one at the anterior part of each
      kidney (Figure 22.4 a). The gland is composed of two types of tissues.
      The centrally located tissue is called the adrenal medulla, and outside
      this lies the adrenal cortex (Figure 22.4 b).
     CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                                335




            Figure 22.4 Diagrammatic representation of : (a) Adrenal gland above kidney
                         (b) Section showing two parts of adrenal gland


     The adrenal medulla secretes two hormones called adrenaline or
epinephrine and noradrenaline or norepinephrine. These are
commonly called as catecholamines. Adrenaline and noradrenaline are
rapidly secreted in response to stress of any kind and during emergency
situations and are called emergency hormones or hormones of Fight
or Flight. These hormones increase alertness, pupilary dilation,
piloerection (raising of hairs), sweating etc. Both the hormones increase
the heart beat, the strength of heart contraction and the rate of respiration.
Catecholamines also stimulate the breakdown of glycogen resulting in
an increased concentration of glucose in blood. In addition, they also
stimulate the breakdown of lipids and proteins.
     The adrenal cortex can be divided into three layers, called zona
reticularis (inner layer), zona fasciculata (middle layer) and zona
glomerulosa (outer layer). The adrenal cortex secretes many hormones,
commonly called as corticoids. The corticoids, which are involved in
carbohydrate metabolism are called glucocorticoids. In our body, cortisol
is the main glucocorticoid. Corticoids, which regulate the balance of water
and electrolytes in our body are called mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone is
the main mineralocorticoid in our body.
     Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, lipolysis and proteolysis;
and inhibit cellular uptake and utilisation of amino acids. Cortisol is also
involved in maintaining the cardio-vascular system as well as the kidney
functions. Glucocorticoids, particularly cortisol, produces anti-
inflammatory reactions and suppresses the immune response. Cortisol
336                                                                     BIOLOGY


      stimulates the RBC production. Aldosterone acts mainly at the renal
      tubules and stimulates the reabsorption of Na+ and water and excretion
      of K+ and phosphate ions. Thus, aldosterone helps in the maintenance of
      electrolytes, body fluid volume, osmotic pressure and blood pressure.
      Small amounts of androgenic steroids are also secreted by the adrenal
      cortex which play a role in the growth of axial hair, pubic hair and facial
      hair during puberty.


      22.2.8    Pancreas
      Pancreas is a composite gland (Figure 22.1) which acts as both exocrine
      and endocrine gland. The endocrine pancreas consists of ‘Islets of
      Langerhans’. There are about 1 to 2 million Islets of Langerhans in a
      normal human pancreas representing only 1 to 2 per cent of the pancreatic
      tissue. The two main types of cells in the Islet of Langerhans are called
      α-cells and β-cells. The α-cells secrete a hormone called glucagon, while
      the β-cells secrete insulin.
          Glucagon is a peptide hormone, and plays an important role in
      maintaining the normal blood glucose levels. Glucagon acts mainly on
      the liver cells (hepatocytes) and stimulates glycogenolysis resulting in an
      increased blood sugar (hyperglycemia). In addition, this hormone
      stimulates the process of gluconeogenesis which also contributes to
      hyperglycemia. Glucagon reduces the cellular glucose uptake and
      utilisation. Thus, glucagon is a hyperglycemic hormone.
          Insulin is a peptide hormone, which plays a major role in the
      regulation of glucose homeostasis. Insulin acts mainly on hepatocytes
      and adipocytes (cells of adipose tissue), and enhances cellular glucose
      uptake and utilisation. As a result, there is a rapid movement of glucose
      from blood to hepatocytes and adipocytes resulting in decreased blood
      glucose levels (hypoglycemia). Insulin also stimulates conversion of
      glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) in the target cells. The glucose
      homeostasis in blood is thus maintained jointly by the two – insulin and
      glucagons.
          Prolonged hyperglycemia leads to a complex disorder called diabetes
      mellitus which is associated with loss of glucose through urine and
      formation of harmful compounds known as ketone bodies. Diabetic
      patients are successfully treated with insulin therapy.


      22.2.9 Testis
      A pair of testis is present in the scrotal sac (outside abdomen) of male
      individuals (Figure 22.1). Testis performs dual functions as a primary
    CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                      337


sex organ as well as an endocrine gland. Testis is composed of
seminiferous tubules and stromal or interstitial tissue. The Leydig
cells or interstitial cells, which are present in the intertubular spaces
produce a group of hormones called androgens mainly testosterone.
    Androgens regulate the development, maturation and functions of
the male accessory sex organs like epididymis, vas deferens, seminal
vesicles, prostate gland, urethra etc. These hormones stimulate muscular
growth, growth of facial and axillary hair, aggressiveness, low pitch of
voice etc. Androgens play a major stimulatory role in the process of
spermatogenesis (formation of spermatozoa). Androgens act on the central
neural system and influence the male sexual behaviour (libido). These
hormones produce anabolic (synthetic) effects on protein and carbohydrate
metabolism.


22.2.10     Ovary
Females have a pair of ovaries located in the abdomen (Figure 22.1). Ovary
is the primary female sex organ which produces one ovum during each
menstrual cycle. In addition, ovary also produces two groups of steroid
hormones called estrogen and progesterone. Ovary is composed of
ovarian follicles and stromal tissues. The estrogen is synthesised and
secreted mainly by the growing ovarian follicles. After ovulation, the
ruptured follicle is converted to a structure called corpus luteum, which
secretes mainly progesterone.
    Estrogens produce wide ranging actions such as stimulation of growth
and activities of female secondary sex organs, development of growing
ovarian follicles, appearance of female secondary sex characters (e.g., high
pitch of voice, etc.), mammary gland development. Estrogens also regulate
female sexual behaviour.
    Progesterone supports pregnancy. Progesterone also acts on the
mammary glands and stimulates the formation of alveoli (sac-like
structures which store milk) and milk secretion.


22.3 HORMONES OF HEART, KIDNEY AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT

Now you know about the endocrine glands and their hormones. However,
as mentioned earlier, hormones are also secreted by some tissues which
are not endocrine glands. For example, the atrial wall of our heart secretes
a very important peptide hormone called atrial natriuretic factor (ANF),
which decreases blood pressure. When blood pressure is increased, ANF
is secreted which causes dilation of the blood vessels. This reduces the
blood pressure.
338                                                                       BIOLOGY


          The juxtaglomerular cells of kidney produce a peptide hormone called
      erythropoietin which stimulates erythropoiesis (formation of RBC).
          Endocrine cells present in different parts of the gastro-intestinal tract
      secrete four major peptide hormones, namely gastrin, secretin,
      cholecystokinin (CCK) and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). Gastrin
      acts on the gastric glands and stimulates the secretion of hydrochloric
      acid and pepsinogen. Secretin acts on the exocrine pancreas and
      stimulates secretion of water and bicarbonate ions. CCK acts on both
      pancreas and gall bladder and stimulates the secretion of pancreatic
      enzymes and bile juice, respectively. GIP inhibits gastric secretion and
      motility. Several other non-endocrine tissues secrete hormones called
      growth factors. These factors are essential for the normal growth of tissues
      and their repairing/regeneration.

      22.4 MECHANISM OF HORMONE ACTION
      Hormones produce their effects on target tissues by binding to specific
      proteins called hormone receptors located in the target tissues only.
      Hormone receptors present on the cell membrane of the target cells are
      called membrane-bound receptors and the receptors present inside the
      target cell are called intracellular receptors, mostly nuclear receptors
      (present in the nucleus). Binding of a hormone to its receptor leads to the
      formation of a hormone-receptor complex (Figure 22.5 a, b). Each
      receptor is specific to one hormone only and hence receptors are specific.
      Hormone-Receptor complex formation leads to certain biochemical
      changes in the target tissue. Target tissue metabolism and hence
      physiological functions are regulated by hormones. On the basis of their
      chemical nature, hormones can be divided into groups :
           (i) peptide, polypeptide, protein hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon,
               pituitary hormones, hypothalamic hormones, etc.)
          (ii) steroids (e.g., cortisol, testosterone, estradiol and progesterone)
         (iii) iodothyronines (thyroid hormones)
         (iv) amino-acid derivatives (e.g., epinephrine).
         Hormones which interact with membrane-bound receptors normally
      do not enter the target cell, but generate second messengers (e.g., cyclic
      AMP, IP3, Ca++ etc) which in turn regulate cellular metabolism (Figure
      22.5a). Hormones which interact with intracellular receptors (e.g., steroid
      hormones, iodothyronines, etc.) mostly regulate gene expression or
      chromosome function by the interaction of hormone-receptor complex
      with the genome. Cumulative biochemical actions result in physiological
      and developmental effects (Figure 22.5b).
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                           339




                                        (a)




                                        (b)
  Figure 22.5 Diagramatic representation of the mechanism of hormone action :
              (a) Protein hormone (b) Steroid hormone
340                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                                          SUMMARY

      There are special chemicals which act as hormones and provide chemical
      coordination, integration and regulation in the human body. These hormones
      regulate metabolism, growth and development of our organs, the endocrine glands
      or certain cells. The endocrine system is composed of hypothalamus, pituitary
      and pineal, thyroid, adrenal, pancreas, parathyroid, thymus and gonads (testis
      and ovary). In addition to these, some other organs, e.g., gastrointestinal tract,
      kidney, heart etc., also produce hormones. The pituitary gland is divided into
      three major parts, which are called as pars distalis, pars intermedia and pars
      nervosa. Pars distalis produces six trophic hormones. Pars intermedia secretes
      only one hormone, while pars nervosa (neurohypophysis) secretes two hormones.
      The pituitary hormones regulate the growth and development of somatic tissues
      and activities of peripheral endocrine glands. Pineal gland secretes melatonin,
      which plays a very important role in the regulation of 24-hour (diurnal) rhythms
      of our body (e.g., rhythms of sleep and state of being awake, body temperature,
      etc.). The thyroid gland hormones play an important role in the regulation of the
      basal metabolic rate, development and maturation of the central neural system,
      erythropoiesis, metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats, menstrual cycle.
      Another thyroid hormone, i.e., thyrocalcitonin regulates calcium levels in our blood
      by decreasing it. The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) which
      increases the blood Ca2+ levels and plays a major role in calcium homeostasis. The
      thymus gland secretes thymosins which play a major role in the differentiation of
      T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated immunity. In addition, thymosins
      also increase the production of antibodies to provide humoral immunity. The
      adrenal gland is composed of the centrally located adrenal medulla and the outer
      adrenal cortex. The adrenal medulla secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine.
      These hormones increase alertness, pupilary dilation, piloerection, sweating, heart
      beat, strength of heart contraction, rate of respiration, glycogenolysis, lipolysis,
      proteolysis. The adrenal cortex secretes glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids.
      Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, proteolysis, erythropoiesis,
      cardio-vascular system, blood pressure, and glomerular filtration rate and inhibit
      inflammatory reactions by suppressing the immune response. Mineralocorticoids
      regulate water and electrolyte contents of the body. The endocrine pancreas secretes
      glucagon and insulin. Glucagon stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
      resulting in hyperglycemia. Insulin stimulates cellular glucose uptake and
      utilisation, and glycogenesis resulting in hypoglycemia. Insulin deficiency
      and/or insulin resistance result in a disease called diabetes mellitus.
          The testis secretes androgens, which stimulate the development, maturation
      and functions of the male accessory sex organs, appearance of the male secondary
      sex characters, spermatogenesis, male sexual behaviour, anabolic pathways and
      erythropoiesis. The ovary secretes estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen stimulates
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION                                                  341


 growth and development of female accessory sex organs and secondary sex
 characters. Progesterone plays a major role in the maintenance of pregnancy as
 well as in mammary gland development and lactation. The atrial wall of the heart
 produces atrial natriuretic factor which decreases the blood pressure. Kidney
 produces erythropoietin which stimulates erythropoiesis. The gastrointestinal tract
 secretes gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin and gastric inhibitory peptide. These
 hormones regulate the secretion of digestive juices and help in digestion.



                                        EXERCISES

 1.   Define the following:
      (a) Exocrine gland
      (b) Endocrine gland
      (c) Hormone
 2.   Diagrammatically indicate the location of the various endocrine glands in our
      body.
 3.   List the hormones secreted by the following:
      (a) Hypothalamus (b) Pituitary     (c) Thyroid    (d) Parathyroid
      (e) Adrenal      (f) Pancreas      (g) Testis     (h) Ovary
      (i) Thymus       (j) Atrium        (k) Kidney     (l) G-I Tract
 4.   Fill in the blanks:
      Hormones                           Target gland
      (a) Hypothalamic hormones         __________________
      (b) Thyrotrophin (TSH)            __________________
      (c) Corticotrophin (ACTH)         __________________
      (d) Gonadotrophins (LH, FSH)      __________________
      (e) Melanotrophin (MSH)           __________________
 5.   Write short notes on the functions of the following hormones:
      (a) Parathyroid hormone (PTH)      (b) Thyroid hormones
      (c) Thymosins                      (d) Androgens
      (e) Estrogens                      (f) Insulin and Glucagon
 6.   Give example(s) of:
      (a) Hyperglycemic hormone and hypoglycemic hormone
      (b) Hypercalcemic hormone
      (c) Gonadotrophic hormones
      (d) Progestational hormone
      (e) Blood pressure lowering hormone
      (f) Androgens and estrogens
342                                                                      BIOLOGY


      7.   Which hormonal deficiency is responsible for the following:
           (a) Diabetes mellitus   (b) Goitre    (c) Cretinism
      8.   Briefly mention the mechanism of action of FSH.
      9.   Match the following:
           Column I         Column II
           (a) T4             (i) Hypothalamus
           (b) PTH           (ii) Thyroid
           (c) GnRH         (iii) Pituitary
           (d) LH           (iv) Parathyroid
     PLANT KINGDOM                                                                            29




                        CHAPTER 3
                        PLANT KINGDOM
3.1 Algae               In the previous chapter, we looked at the broad classification of living
                        organisms under the system proposed by Whittaker (1969) wherein he
3.2 Bryophytes
                        suggested the Five Kingdom classification viz. Monera, Protista, Fungi,
3.3 Pteridophytes       Animalia and Plantae. In this chapter, we will deal in detail with further
                        classification within Kingdom Plantae popularly known as the ‘plant
3.4 Gymnosperms
                        kingdom’.
3.5 Angiosperms             We must stress here that our understanding of the plant kingdom
                        has changed over time. Fungi, and members of the Monera and Protista
3.6 Plant Life Cycles
                        having cell walls have now been excluded from Plantae though earlier
    and Alternation
                        classifications placed them in the same kingdom. So, the cyanobacteria
    of Generations      that are also referred to as blue green algae are not ‘algae’ any more. In
                        this chapter, we will describe Plantae under Algae, Bryophytes,
                        Pteridophytes, Gymnosperms and Angiosperms.
                            Let us also look at classification within angiosperms to understand
                        some of the concerns that influenced the classification systems. The
                        earliest systems of classification used only gross superficial morphological
                        characters such as habit, colour, number and shape of leaves, etc. They
                        were based mainly on vegetative characters or on the androecium
                        structure (system given by Linnaeus). Such systems were artificial; they
                        separated the closely related species since they were based on a few
                        characteristics. Also, the artificial systems gave equal weightage to
                        vegetative and sexual characteristics; this is not acceptable since we know
                        that often the vegetative characters are more easily affected by
                        environment. As against this, natural classification systems developed,
                        which were based on natural affinities among the organisms and consider,




                                                                                               2017-18
30                                                                     BIOLOGY


     not only the external features, but also internal features, like ultra-
     structure, anatomy, embryology and phytochemistry. Such a
     classification for flowering plants was given by George Bentham and
     Joseph Dalton Hooker.
         At present phylogenetic classification systems based on
     evolutionary relationships between the various organisms are acceptable.
     This assumes that organisms belonging to the same taxa have a common
     ancestor. We now use information from many other sources too to help
     resolve difficulties in classification. These become more important when
     there is no supporting fossil evidence. Numerical Taxonomy which is
     now easily carried out using computers is based on all observable
     characteristics. Number and codes are assigned to all the characters and
     the data are then processed. In this way each character is given equal
     importance and at the same time hundreds of characters can be
     considered. Cytotaxonomy that is based on cytological information like
     chromosome number, structure, behaviour and chemotaxonomy that
     uses the chemical constituents of the plant to resolve confusions, are also
     used by taxonomists these days.


     3.1 ALGAE
     Algae are chlorophyll-bearing, simple, thalloid, autotrophic and largely
     aquatic (both fresh water and marine) organisms. They occur in a variety
     of other habitats: moist stones, soils and wood. Some of them also occur
     in association with fungi (lichen) and animals (e.g., on sloth bear).
         The form and size of algae is highly variable (Figure 3.1). The size
     ranges from the microscopic unicellular forms like Chlamydomonas, to
     colonial forms like Volvox and to the filamentous forms like Ulothrix and
     Spirogyra. A few of the marine forms such as kelps, form massive plant
     bodies.
         The algae reproduce by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
     Vegetative reproduction is by fragmentation. Each fragment develops into
     a thallus. Asexual reproduction is by the production of different types of
     spores, the most common being the zoospores. They are flagellated
     (motile) and on germination gives rise to new plants. Sexual reproduction
     takes place through fusion of two gametes. These gametes can be
     flagellated and similar in size (as in Chlamydomonas) or non-flagellated
     (non-motile) but similar in size (as in Spirogyra). Such reproduction is
     called isogamous. Fusion of two gametes dissimilar in size, as in some
     species of Chlamydomonas is termed as anisogamous. Fusion between
     one large, non-motile (static) female gamete and a smaller, motile male
     gamete is termed oogamous, e.g., Volvox, Fucus.




                                                                       2017-18
PLANT KINGDOM                                                                                                31




                                                                        Flagella
                                      Daughter
                                       colony
                                                                                                   Branches


                                       Parent                                                    Axis
                                       colony


            (a-i)                                         (a-ii)



                                                                                      (a-iii)



                                                          Air bladder
                                                                                                     Frond
                                                           Frond
                                                          Midrib
                    Frond




            Stipe
                                                          Holdfast
                                                                                                 Stipe
              Holdfast
                                                 (b-ii)
    (b-i)                                                                              (b-iii)




                                        Frond                                      Main axis




                                                                                       Branches




                            (c-i)
                                                                     (c-ii)
 Figure 3.1 Algae :                 (a) Green algae (i) Volvox (ii) Chlamydomonas (iii) Chara
                                    (b) Brown algae (i) Laminaria (ii) Fucus (iii) Dictyota
                                    (c) Red algae (i) Porphyra (ii) Polysiphonia




                                                                                                             2017-18
32                                                                        BIOLOGY


         Algae are useful to man in a variety of ways. At least a half of the total
     carbon dioxide fixation on earth is carried out by algae through
     photosynthesis. Being photosynthetic they increase the level of dissolved
     oxygen in their immediate environment. They are of paramount
     importance as primary producers of energy-rich compounds which form
     the basis of the food cycles of all aquatic animals. Many species of Porphyra,
     Laminaria and Sargassum are among the 70 species of marine algae
     used as food. Certain marine brown and red algae produce large amounts
     of hydrocolloids (water holding substances), e.g., algin (brown algae) and
     carrageen (red algae) which are used commercially. Agar, one of the
     commercial products obtained from Gelidium and Gracilaria are used to
     grow microbes and in preparations of ice-creams and jellies. Chlorella a
     unicellular alga rich in proteins is used as food supplement even by space
     travellers. The algae are divided into three main classes: Chlorophyceae,
     Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.

     3.1.1 Chlorophyceae
     The members of chlorophyceae are commonly called green algae. The
     plant body may be unicellular, colonial or filamentous. They are usually
     grass green due to the dominance of pigments chlorophyll a and b. The
     pigments are localised in definite chloroplasts. The chloroplasts may be
     discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon-shaped in
     different species. Most of the members have one or more storage bodies
     called pyrenoids located in the chloroplasts. Pyrenoids contain protein
     besides starch. Some algae may store food in the form of oil droplets.
     Green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made of an inner layer of cellulose
     and an outer layer of pectose.
         Vegetative reproduction usually takes place by fragmentation or by
     formation of different types of spores. Asexual reproduction is by
     flagellated zoospores produced in zoosporangia. The sexual reproduction
     shows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells and it
     may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous. Some commonly found
     green algae are: Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ulothrix, Spirogyra and Chara
     (Figure 3.1a).

     3.1.2 Phaeophyceae
     The members of phaeophyceae or brown algae are found primarily in
     marine habitats. They show great variation in size and form. They range
     from simple branched, filamentous forms (Ectocarpus) to profusely
     branched forms as represented by kelps, which may reach a height of
     100 metres. They possess chlorophyll a, c, carotenoids and xanthophylls.
     They vary in colour from olive green to various shades of brown depending
     upon the amount of the xanthophyll pigment, fucoxanthin present in




                                                                         2017-18
     PLANT KINGDOM                                                                           33


them. Food is stored as complex carbohydrates, which may be in the
form of laminarin or mannitol. The vegetative cells have a cellulosic wall
usually covered on the outside by a gelatinous coating of algin. The
protoplast contains, in addition to plastids, a centrally located vacuole
and nucleus. The plant body is usually attached to the substratum by a
holdfast, and has a stalk, the stipe and leaf like photosynthetic organ –
the frond. Vegetative reproduction takes place by fragmentation. Asexual
reproduction in most brown algae is by biflagellate zoospores that are
pear-shaped and have two unequal laterally attached flagella.
    Sexual reproduction may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous.
Union of gametes may take place in water or within the oogonium
(oogamous species). The gametes are pyriform (pear-shaped) and bear
two laterally attached flagella. The common forms are Ectocarpus, Dictyota,
Laminaria, Sargassum and Fucus (Figure 3.1b).

3.1.3 Rhodophyceae
The members of rhodophyceae are commonly called red algae because of
the predominance of the red pigment, r-phycoerythrin in their body. Majority
of the red algae are marine with greater concentrations found in the warmer
areas. They occur in both well-lighted regions close to the surface of water
and also at great depths in oceans where relatively little light penetrates.
     The red thalli of most of the red algae are multicellular. Some of them
have complex body organisation. The food is stored as floridean starch
which is very similar to amylopectin and glycogen in structure.
     The red algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation. They
reproduce asexually by non-motile spores and sexually by non-motile

                 TABLE 3.1 Divisions of Algae and their Main Characteristics

Classes          Common     Major            Stored      Cell Wall    Flagellar   Habitat
                 Name       Pigments         Food                     Number and
                                                                      Position of
                                                                      Insertions
Chlorophyceae Green         Chlorophyll      Starch      Cellulose    2-8, equal,   Fresh water,
              algae         a, b                                      apical        brackish water,
                                                                                    salt water
Phaeophyceae     Brown      Chlorophyll      Mannitol,   Cellulose    2, unequal,   Fresh water
                 algae      a, c,            laminarin   and algin    lateral       (rare) brackish
                            fucoxanthin                                             water, salt
                                                                                    water
Rhodophyceae Red            Chlorophyll   Floridean      Cellulose, Absent          Fresh water
             algae          a, d,         starch         pectin and                 (some),
                            phycoerythrin                poly                       brackish
                                                         sulphate                   water, salt
                                                         esters                     water (most)




                                                                                              2017-18
34                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                    gametes. Sexual reproduction is oogamous and accompanied by complex
                    post fertilisation developments. The common members are: Polysiphonia,
                    Porphyra (Figure 3.1c), Gracilaria and Gelidium.


                    3.2 BRYOPHYTES

                    Bryophytes include the various mosses and liverworts that are found
                    commonly growing in moist shaded areas in the hills (Figure 3.2).


                                                                          Antheridiophore
                     Archegoniophore




                        Gemma cup                                           Gemma cup




                              Rhizoids                                        Rhizoids
                        (a)                                         (b)

                                                     Antheridial
                                   Capsule            branch                          Branches


 Sporophyte
                            Seta


                       Leaves

                                                                                   Archegonial
                                                                                   branch

Gametophyte
                               Main axis
                                   Rhizoids

                                                                      (d)
                      (c)

     Figure 3.2 Bryophytes: A liverwort – Marchantia (a) Female thallus (b) Male thallus
                Mosses – (c) Funaria, gametophyte and sporophyte (d) Sphagnum
                gametophyte




                                                                                         2017-18
     PLANT KINGDOM                                                             35


Bryophytes are also called amphibians of the plant kingdom because
these plants can live in soil but are dependent on water for sexual
reproduction. They usually occur in damp, humid and shaded localities.
They play an important role in plant succession on bare rocks/soil.
     The plant body of bryophytes is more differentiated than that of algae.
It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect, and attached to the substratum
by unicellular or multicellular rhizoids. They lack true roots, stem or
leaves. They may possess root-like, leaf-like or stem-like structures. The
main plant body of the bryophyte is haploid. It produces gametes, hence
is called a gametophyte. The sex organs in bryophytes are multicellular.
The male sex organ is called antheridium. They produce biflagellate
antherozoids. The female sex organ called archegonium is flask-shaped
and produces a single egg. The antherozoids are released into water where
they come in contact with archegonium. An antherozoid fuses with the
egg to produce the zygote. Zygotes do not undergo reduction division
immediately. They produce a multicellular body called a sporophyte.
The sporophyte is not free-living but attached to the photosynthetic
gametophyte and derives nourishment from it. Some cells of the
sporophyte undergo reduction division (meiosis) to produce haploid
spores. These spores germinate to produce gametophyte.
     Bryophytes in general are of little economic importance but some
mosses provide food for herbaceous mammals, birds and other animals.
Species of Sphagnum, a moss, provide peat that have long been used as
fuel, and as packing material for trans-shipment of living material because
of their capacity to hold water. Mosses along with lichens are the first
organisms to colonise rocks and hence, are of great ecological importance.
They decompose rocks making the substrate suitable for the growth of
higher plants. Since mosses form dense mats on the soil, they reduce the
impact of falling rain and prevent soil erosion. The bryophytes are divided
into liverworts and mosses.

3.2.1    Liverworts
The liverworts grow usually in moist, shady habitats such as banks of
streams, marshy ground, damp soil, bark of trees and deep in the woods.
The plant body of a liverwort is thalloid, e.g., Marchantia. The thallus is
dorsiventral and closely appressed to the substrate. The leafy members
have tiny leaf-like appendages in two rows on the stem-like structures.
    Asexual reproduction in liverworts takes place by fragmentation of
thalli, or by the formation of specialised structures called gemmae
(sing. gemma). Gemmae are green, multicellular, asexual buds, which
develop in small receptacles called gemma cups located on the thalli.
The gemmae become detached from the parent body and germinate to
form new individuals. During sexual reproduction, male and female sex




                                                                               2017-18
36                                                                     BIOLOGY


     organs are produced either on the same or on different thalli. The
     sporophyte is differentiated into a foot, seta and capsule. After meiosis,
     spores are produced within the capsule. These spores germinate to form
     free-living gametophytes.

     3.2.2 Mosses
     The predominant stage of the life cycle of a moss is the gametophyte which
     consists of two stages. The first stage is the protonema stage, which
     develops directly from a spore. It is a creeping, green, branched and
     frequently filamentous stage. The second stage is the leafy stage, which
     develops from the secondary protonema as a lateral bud. They consist of
     upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. They are attached
     to the soil through multicellular and branched rhizoids. This stage bears
     the sex organs.
         Vegetative reproduction in mosses is by fragmentation and budding
     in the secondary protonema. In sexual reproduction, the sex organs
     antheridia and archegonia are produced at the apex of the leafy shoots.
     After fertilisation, the zygote develops into a sporophyte, consisting of a
     foot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte in mosses is more elaborate than
     that in liverworts. The capsule contains spores. Spores are formed after
     meiosis. The mosses have an elaborate mechanism of spore dispersal.
     Common examples of mosses are Funaria, Polytrichum and Sphagnum
     (Figure 3.2).


     3.3 PTERIDOPHYTES
     The Pteridophytes include horsetails and ferns. Pteridophytes are used
     for medicinal purposes and as soil-binders. They are also frequently grown
     as ornamentals. Evolutionarily, they are the first terrestrial plants to
     possess vascular tissues – xylem and phloem. You shall study more about
     these tissues in Chapter 6. The pteridophytes are found in cool, damp,
     shady places though some may flourish well in sandy-soil conditions.
         You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the life
     cycle is the gametophytic plant body. However, in pteridophytes, the
     main plant body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root,
     stem and leaves (Figure 3.3). These organs possess well-differentiated
     vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are small (microphylls) as
     in Selaginella or large (macrophylls) as in ferns. The sporophytes bear
     sporangia that are subtended by leaf-like appendages called
     sporophylls. In some cases sporophylls may form distinct compact
     structures called strobili or cones (Selaginella, Equisetum). The
     sporangia produce spores by meiosis in spore mother cells. The spores
     germinate to give rise to inconspicuous, small but multicellular,




                                                                       2017-18
PLANT KINGDOM                                                                           37




                                                                               Strobilus




                                                                                 Node

                                                                               Internode




                                                                                 Branch




                                                    Rhizome



                                                                   (b)




                                                                         (d)
                (c)


    Figure 3.3 Pteridophytes : (a) Selaginella (b) Equisetum (c) Fern (d) Salvinia




                                                                                        2017-18
38                                                                        BIOLOGY


     free-living, mostly photosynthetic thalloid gametophytes called
     prothallus. These gametophytes require cool, damp, shady places to
     grow. Because of this specific restricted requirement and the need for
     water for fertilisation, the spread of living pteridophytes is limited and
     restricted to narrow geographical regions. The gametophytes bear male
     and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia, respectively.
     Water is required for transfer of antherozoids – the male gametes released
     from the antheridia, to the mouth of archegonium. Fusion of male gamete
     with the egg present in the archegonium result in the formation of zygote.
     Zygote thereafter produces a multicellular well-differentiated sporophyte
     which is the dominant phase of the pteridophytes. In majority of the
     pteridophytes all the spores are of similar kinds; such plants are called
     homosporous. Genera like Selaginella and Salvinia which produce
     two kinds of spores, macro (large) and micro (small) spores, are known
     as heterosporous. The megaspores and microspores germinate and give
     rise to female and male gametophytes, respectively. The female
     gametophytes in these plants are retained on the parent sporophytes
     for variable periods. The development of the zygotes into young embryos
     take place within the female gametophytes. This event is a precursor to
     the seed habit considered an important step in evolution.
         The pteridophytes are further classified into four classes: Psilopsida
     (Psilotum); Lycopsida (Selaginella, Lycopodium), Sphenopsida (Equisetum)
     and Pteropsida (Dryopteris, Pteris, Adiantum).


     3.4 GYMNOSPERMS
     The gymnosperms (gymnos : naked, sperma : seeds) are plants in which
     the ovules are not enclosed by any ovary wall and remain exposed, both
     before and after fertilisation. The seeds that develop post-fertilisation, are
     not covered, i.e., are naked. Gymnosperms include medium-sized trees
     or tall trees and shrubs (Figure 3.4). One of the gymnosperms, the giant
     redwood tree Sequoia is one of the tallest tree species. The roots are
     generally tap roots. Roots in some genera have fungal association in the
     form of mycorrhiza (Pinus), while in some others (Cycas) small specialised
     roots called coralloid roots are associated with N2- fixing cyanobacteria.
     The stems are unbranched (Cycas) or branched (Pinus, Cedrus). The leaves
     may be simple or compound. In Cycas the pinnate leaves persist for a few
     years. The leaves in gymnosperms are well-adapted to withstand extremes
     of temperature, humidity and wind. In conifers, the needle-like leaves
     reduce the surface area. Their thick cuticle and sunken stomata also
     help to reduce water loss.




                                                                          2017-18
    PLANT KINGDOM                                                                         39


    The gymnosperms are heterosporous; they produce
haploid microspores and megaspores. The two kinds of
spores are produced within sporangia that are borne on
sporophylls which are arranged spirally along an axis to
form lax or compact strobili or cones. The strobili bearing
microsporophylls and microsporangia are called
microsporangiate or male strobili. The microspores
develop into a male gametophytic generation which is
highly reduced and is confined to only a limited number
of cells. This reduced gametophyte is called a pollen
grain. The development of pollen grains take place within
the microsporangia. The cones bearing megasporophylls                       (a)
with ovules or megasporangia are called
macrosporangiate or female strobili. The male or female
cones or strobili may be borne on the same tree (Pinus).
However, in cycas male cones and megasporophylls are
borne on different trees. The megaspore mother cell is
differentiated from one of the cells of the nucellus. The
nucellus is protected by envelopes and the composite
structure is called an ovule. The ovules are borne on
megasporophylls which may be clustered to form the
female cones. The megaspore mother cell divides
meiotically to form four megaspores. One of the
megaspores enclosed within the megasporangium
develops into a multicellular female gametophyte that
bears two or more archegonia or female sex organs. The
multicellular female gametophyte is also retained within
megasporangium.                                                             (b)
    Unlike bryophytes and pteridophytes, in
gymnosperms the male and the female gametophytes
do not have an independent free-living existence. They Dwarf Shoot
remain within the sporangia retained on the
sporophytes. The pollen grain is released from the
microsporangium. They are carried in air currents and          Long Shoot
                                                                                      Dwarf
                                                                                      shoot
come in contact with the opening of the ovules borne
on megasporophylls. The pollen tube carrying the male
gametes grows towards archegonia in the ovules and
discharge their contents near the mouth of the                      Seeds       Long
                                                                                           Seeds
                                                                                shoot
archegonia. Following fertilisation, zygote develops into
an embryo and the ovules into seeds. These seeds are                        (c)
not covered.                                                Figure 3.4 Gymnosperms: (a) Cycas
                                                                   (b) Pinus (c) Ginkgo




                                                                                           2017-18
40                                                                                BIOLOGY


             3.5 ANGIOSPERMS

             Unlike the gymnosperms where the ovules are naked, in the angiosperms
             or flowering plants, the pollen grains and ovules are developed in specialised
             structures called flowers. In angiosperms, the seeds are enclosed by fruits.
             The angiosperms are an exceptionally large group of plants occurring in
             wide range of habitats. They range in size from tiny, almost microscopic
             Wolfia to tall trees of Eucalyptus (over 100 metres). They provide us with
             food, fodder, fuel, medicines and several other commercially important
             products. They are divided into two classes : the dicotyledons and the
             monocotyledons (Figure 3.5). The dicotyledons are characterised by
             having two cotyledons in their seeds while the monocolyledons have only
             one. The male sex organ in a flower is the stamen. Each stamen consists of
             a slender filament with an anther at the tip. The anthers, following meiosis,
             produce pollen grains. The female sex organ in a flower is the pistil or the
             carpel. Pistil consists of an ovary enclosing one to many ovules. Within
             ovules are present highly reduced female gametophytes termed embryo-
             sacs. The embryo-sac formation is preceded by meiosis. Hence, each of the
             cells of an embryo-sac is haploid. Each embryo-sac has a three-celled egg
             apparatus – one egg cell and two synergids, three antipodal cells and
             two polar nuclei. The polar nuclei eventually fuse to produce a diploid
             secondary nucleus. Pollen grain, after dispersal from the anthers, are carried
             by wind or various other agencies to the stigma of a pistil. This is termed as




                   (a)                                    (b)
     Figure 3.5 Angiosperms : (a) A dicotyledon (b) A monocotyledon




                                                                                  2017-18
     PLANT KINGDOM                                                             41


pollination. The pollen grains germinate on the stigma and the resulting
pollen tubes grow through the tissues of stigma and style and reach the
ovule. The pollen tubes enter the embryo-sac where two male gametes are
discharged. One of the male gametes fuses with the egg cell to form a zygote
(syngamy). The other male gamete fuses with the diploid secondary nucleus
to produce the triploid primary endosperm nucleus (PEN). Because of the
involvement of two fusions, this event is termed as double fertilisation,
an event unique to angiosperms. The zygote develops into an embryo (with
one or two cotyledons) and the PEN develops into endosperm which provides
nourishment to the developing embryo. The synergids and antipodals
degenerate after fertilisation. During these events the ovules develop into
seeds and the ovaries develop into fruit. The life cycle of an angiosperm is
shown in Figure 3.6.




                              Figure 3.6 Life cycle of an angiosperm




                                                                               2017-18
        42                                                                                             BIOLOGY


                                                      3.6   PLANT LIFE CYCLES       AND   ALTERNATION     OF
                          Zygote                            GENERATIONS
             Sy            (2n)    Meiosis
               ng
                  am                                In plants, both haploid and diploid cells can divide by
                      y                      Spores
                           A                   (n)  mitosis. This ability leads to the formation of different
                                                    plant bodies - haploid and diploid. The haploid plant
   Gametogenesis                                    body produces gametes by mitosis. This plant body
                                     B
                                                    represents a gametophyte. Following fertilisation the
                      Haplontic
                                                    zygote also divides by mitosis to produce a diploid
                                                    sporophytic plant body. Haploid spores are produced
                                                    by this plant body by meiosis. These in turn, divide by
                                                    mitosis to form a haploid plant body once again. Thus,
                                          (a)
                    Gametophyte                     during the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant,
                          (n)
                                                    there is an alternation of generations between gamete
                                                    producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing
                                                    diploid sporophyte.
                                                        However, different plant groups, as well as individuals
                                                    representing them, differ in the following patterns:
                                                    1. Sporophytic generation is represented only by the
                                                         one-celled zygote. There are no free-living
                                                         sporophytes. Meiosis in the zygote results in the
                                                         formation of haploid spores. The haploid spores
                                                         divide mitotically and form the gametophyte. The
                                                         dominant, photosynthetic phase in such plants is
                                                         the free-living gametophyte. This kind of life cycle
                                                         is termed as haplontic. Many algae such as Volvox,
                                                         Spirogyra and some species of Chlamydomonas
                                                         represent this pattern (Figure 3.7 a).
                    Sporophyte
                        (2n)                        2. On the other extreme, is the type wherein the diploid
          Zygote                                         sporophyte is the dominant, photosynthetic,
           (2n)
                                                         independent phase of the plant. The gametophytic
     Syn                       A
         gam                                             phase is represented by the single to few-celled
             y
                                                         haploid gametophyte. This kind of life cycle is
                                            Meiosis
                                                         termed as diplontic. An alga, Fucus sp., represents
Gametogenesis
                  Haplo-diplontic                        this pattern (Fig. 3.7b). In addition, all seed bearing
                                  B Spores
                                       (n)               plants i.e., gymnosperms and angiosperms, follow
                                                         this pattern with some variations, wherein, the
                                                         gametophytic phase is few to multi-celled.
                 Gametophyte          (c)
                                                    3. Bryophytes and pteridophytes, interestingly, exhibit
                      (n)
                                                         an intermediate condition (Haplo-diplontic); both
 Figure 3.7 Life cycle patterns : (a) Haplontic          phases are multicellular. However, they differ in their
               (b) Diplontic (c) Haplo-diplontic         dominant phases.




                                                                                                      2017-18
    PLANT KINGDOM                                                                            43


    A dominant, independent, photosynthetic, thalloid or erect phase is
represented by a haploid gametophyte and it alternates with the short-
lived multicelluler sporophyte totally or partially dependent on the
gametophyte for its anchorage and nutrition. All bryophytes represent
this pattern.
    The diploid sporophyte is represented by a dominant, independent,
photosynthetic, vascular plant body. It alternates with multicellular,
saprophytic/autotrophic, independent but short-lived haploid
gametophyte. Such a pattern is known as haplo-diplontic life cycle. All
pteridophytes exhibit this pattern (Figure 3.7 c).
    Interestingly, while most algal genera are haplontic, some of them
such as Ectocarpus, Polysiphonia, kelps are haplo-diplontic. Fucus, an
alga is diplontic.



                                             SUMMARY

       Plant kingdom includes algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and
       angiosperms. Algae are chlorophyll-bearing simple, thalloid, autotrophic and
       largely aquatic organisms. Depending on the type of pigment possesed and the
       type of stored food, algae are classfied into three classes, namely Chlorophyceae,
       Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae. Algae usually reproduce vegetatively by
       fragmentation, asexually by formation of different types of spores and sexually by
       formation of gametes which may show isogamy, anisogamy or oogamy.
           Bryophytes are plants which can live in soil but are dependent on water for
       sexual reproduction. Their plant body is more differentiated than that of algae. It
       is thallus-like and prostrate or erect and attached to the substratum by rhizoids.
       They possess root-like, leaf-like and stem-like structures. The bryophytes are
       divided into liverworts and mosses. The plant body of liverworts is thalloid and
       dorsiventral whereas mosses have upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged
       leaves. The main plant body of a bryophyte is gamete-producing and is called a
       gametophyte. It bears the male sex organs called antheridia and female sex organs
       called archegonia. The male and female gametes produced fuse to form zygote
       which produces a multicellular body called a sporophyte. It produces haploid
       spores. The spores germinate to form gametophytes.
           In pteridophytes the main plant is a sporophyte which is differentiated into
       true root, stem and leaves. These organs possess well-differentiated vascular
       tissues. The sporophytes bear sporangia which produce spores. The spores
       germinate to form gametophytes which require cool, damp places to grow. The
       gametophytes bear male and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia,
       respectively. Water is required for transfer of male gametes to archegonium where
       zygote is formed after fertilisation. The zygote produces a sporophyte.




                                                                                             2017-18
44                                                                                          BIOLOGY


         The gymnosperms are the plants in which ovules are not enclosed by any
     ovary wall. After fertilisation the seeds remain exposed and therefore these plants
     are called naked-seeded plants. The gymnosperms produce microspores and
     megaspores which are produced in microsporangia and megasporangia borne on
     the sporophylls. The sporophylls – microsporophylls and megasporophylls – are
     arranged spirally on axis to form male and female cones, respectively. The pollen
     grain germinates and pollen tube releases the male gamete into the ovule, where it
     fuses with the egg cell in archegonia. Following fertilisation, the zygote develops
     into embryo and the ovules into seeds.
         In angiosperms, the male sex organs (stamen) and female sex organs (pistil)
     are borne in a flower. Each stamen consists of a filament and an anther. The anther
     produces pollen grains (male gametophyte) after meiosis. The pistil consists of an
     ovary enclosing one to many ovules. Within the ovule is the female gametophyte
     or embryo sac which contains the egg cell. The pollen tube enters the embryo-sac
     where two male gametes are discharged. One male gamete fuses with egg cell
     (syngamy) and other fuses with diploid secondary nucleus (triple fusion). This
     phenomenon of two fusions is called double fertilisation and is unique to
     angiosperms. The angiosperms are divided into two classes – the dicotyledons
     and the monocotyledons.
         During the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant, there is alternation of
     generations between gamete producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing
     diploid sporophyte. However, different plant groups as well as individuals may
     show different patterns of life cycles – haplontic, diplontic or intermediate.



                                             EXERCISES

     1.   What is the basis of classification of algae?
     2.   When and where does reduction division take place in the life cycle of a liverwort,
          a moss, a fern, a gymnosperm and an angiosperm?
     3.   Name three groups of plants that bear archegonia. Briefly describe the life cycle
          of any one of them.
     4.   Mention the ploidy of the following: protonemal cell of a moss; primary endosperm
          nucleus in dicot, leaf cell of a moss; prothallus cell of a ferm; gemma cell in
          Marchantia; meristem cell of monocot, ovum of a liverwort, and zygote of a fern.
     5.   Write a note on economic importance of algae and gymnosperms.
     6.   Both gymnosperms and angiosperms bear seeds, then why are they classified
          separately?
     7.   What is heterospory? Briefly comment on its significance. Give two examples.




                                                                                           2017-18
PLANT KINGDOM                                                         45


  8.   Explain briefly the following terms with suitable examples:-
         (i)   protonema
        (ii)   antheridium
       (iii)   archegonium
       (iv)    diplontic
        (v)    sporophyll
       (vi)    isogamy
  9.   Differentiate between the following:-
         (i)   red algae and brown algae
        (ii)   liverworts and moss
       (iii)   homosporous and heterosporous pteridophyte
       (iv)    syngamy and triple fusion
  10. How would you distinguish monocots from dicots?
  11. Match the following (column I with column II)
       Column I                       Column II
       (a) Chlamydomonas               (i)   Moss
       (b) Cycas                      (ii)   Pteridophyte
       (c) Selaginella               (iii)   Algae
       (d) Sphagnum                  (iv)    Gymnosperm
  12. Describe the important characteristics of gymnosperms.




                                                                      2017-18
                         UNIT 3
                         CELL: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS


Chapter 8                Biology is the study of living organisms. The detailed description of
Cell: The Unit of Life   their form and appearance only brought out their diversity. It is the
                         cell theory that emphasised the unity underlying this diversity of forms,
Chapter 9                i.e., the cellular organisation of all life forms. A description of cell
Biomolecules             structure and cell growth by division is given in the chapters comprising
                         this unit. Cell theory also created a sense of mystery around living
Chapter 10               phenomena, i.e., physiological and behavioural processes. This mystery
Cell Cycle and           was the requirement of integrity of cellular organisation for living
Cell Division            phenomena to be demonstrated or observed. In studying and
                         understanding the physiological and behavioural processes, one can
                         take a physico-chemical approach and use cell-free systems to
                         investigate. This approach enables us to describe the various processes
                         in molecular terms. The approach is established by analysis of living
                         tissues for elements and compounds. It will tell us what types of organic
                         compounds are present in living organisms. In the next stage, one can
                         ask the question: What are these compounds doing inside a cell? And,
                         in what way they carry out gross physiological processes like digestion,
                         excretion, memory, defense, recognition, etc. In other words we answer
                         the question, what is the molecular basis of all physiological processes?
                         It can also explain the abnormal processes that occur during any
                         diseased condition. This physico-chemical approach to study and
                         understand living organisms is called ‘Reductionist Biology’. The
                         concepts and techniques of physics and chemistry are applied to
                         understand biology. In Chapter 9 of this unit, a brief description of
                         biomolecules is provided.
                    G.N. RAMACHANDRAN, an outstanding figure in the field of protein
                    structure, was the founder of the ‘Madras school’ of
                    conformational analysis of biopolymers. His discovery of the triple
                    helical structure of collagen published in Nature in 1954 and his
                    analysis of the allowed conformations of proteins through the
                    use of the ‘Ramachandran plot’ rank among the most outstanding
                    contributions in structural biology. He was born on October 8,
                    1922, in a small town, not far from Cochin on the southwestern
                    coast of India. His father was a professor of mathematics at a
                    local college and thus had considerable influence in shaping
                    Ramachandran’s interest in mathematics. After completing his
                    school years, Ramachandran graduated in 1942 as the top-
                    ranking student in the B.Sc. (Honors) Physics course of the
                    University of Madras. He received a Ph.D. from Cambridge
                    University in 1949. While at Cambridge, Ramachandran met
                    Linus Pauling and was deeply influenced by his publications on
                    models of the α-helix and β-sheet structures that directed his
                    attention to solving the structure of collagen. He passed away at
G.N. Ramachandran   the age of 78, on April 7, 2001.
   (1922 – 2001)
                              CHAPTER 8
                              CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
8.1 What is a Cell?     When you look around, you see both living and non-living things. You
8.2 Cell Theory         must have wondered and asked yourself – ‘what is it that makes an
                        organism living, or what is it that an inanimate thing does not have which
8.3 An Overview of
                        a living thing has’ ? The answer to this is the presence of the basic unit of
    Cell
                        life – the cell in all living organisms.
8.4 Prokaryotic Cells        All organisms are composed of cells. Some are composed of a single
8.5 Eukaryotic Cells    cell and are called unicellular organisms while others, like us, composed
                        of many cells, are called multicellular organisms.


                        8.1    WHAT    IS A   CELL?

                        Unicellular organisms are capable of (i) independent existence and
                        (ii) performing the essential functions of life. Anything less than a complete
                        structure of a cell does not ensure independent living. Hence, cell is the
                        fundamental structural and functional unit of all living organisms.
                              Anton Von Leeuwenhoek first saw and described a live cell. Robert
                        Brown later discovered the nucleus. The invention of the microscope and
                        its improvement leading to the electron microscope revealed all the
                        structural details of the cell.


                        8.2    CELL THEORY

                        In 1838, Matthias Schleiden, a German botanist, examined a large number
                        of plants and observed that all plants are composed of different kinds of
                        cells which form the tissues of the plant. At about the same time, Theodore
126                                                                           BIOLOGY


      Schwann (1839), a British Zoologist, studied different types of animal cells
      and reported that cells had a thin outer layer which is today known as the
      ‘plasma membrane’. He also concluded, based on his studies on plant
      tissues, that the presence of cell wall is a unique character of the plant
      cells. On the basis of this, Schwann proposed the hypothesis that the bodies
      of animals and plants are composed of cells and products of cells.
          Schleiden and Schwann together formulated the cell theory. This theory
      however, did not explain as to how new cells were formed. Rudolf Virchow
      (1855) first explained that cells divided and new cells are formed from
      pre-existing cells (Omnis cellula-e cellula). He modified the hypothesis of
      Schleiden and Schwann to give the cell theory a final shape. Cell theory
      as understood today is:
      (i) all living organisms are composed of cells and products of cells.
      (ii) all cells arise from pre-existing cells.


      8.3     AN OVERVIEW OF CELL

      You have earlier observed cells in an onion peel and/or human cheek
      cells under the microscope. Let us recollect their structure. The onion cell
      which is a typical plant cell, has a distinct cell wall as its outer boundary
      and just within it is the cell membrane. The cells of the human cheek
      have an outer membrane as the delimiting structure of the cell. Inside
      each cell is a dense membrane bound structure called nucleus. This
      nucleus contains the chromosomes which in turn contain the genetic
      material, DNA. Cells that have membrane bound nuclei are called
      eukaryotic whereas cells that lack a membrane bound nucleus are
      prokaryotic. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, a semi-fluid matrix
      called cytoplasm occupies the volume of the cell. The cytoplasm is the
      main arena of cellular activities in both the plant and animal cells. Various
      chemical reactions occur in it to keep the cell in the ‘living state’.
          Besides the nucleus, the eukaryotic cells have other membrane bound
      distinct structures called organelles like the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
      the golgi complex, lysosomes, mitochondria, microbodies and vacuoles.
      The prokaryotic cells lack such membrane bound organelles.
          Ribosomes are non-membrane bound organelles found in all cells –
      both eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic. Within the cell, ribosomes are
      found not only in the cytoplasm but also within the two organelles –
      chloroplasts (in plants) and mitochondria and on rough ER.
          Animal cells contain another non-membrane bound organelle called
      centriole which helps in cell division.
          Cells differ greatly in size, shape and activities (Figure 8.1). For example,
      Mycoplasmas, the smallest cells, are only 0.3 µm in length while bacteria
      CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                                        127




                                               White blood cells                 Columnar epithelial cells
             Red blood cells                     (amoeboid)                         (long and narrow)
         (round and biconcave)




                                     Nerve cell
                                 (Branched and long)




                                                                                          Mesophyll cells
                                                                                         (round and oval)
                                                                   A tracheid
                                                                   (elongated)

                     Figure 8.1 Diagram showing different shapes of the cells

could be 3 to 5 µm. The largest isolated single cell is the egg of an ostrich.
Among multicellular organisms, human red blood cells are about 7.0
µm in diameter. Nerve cells are some of the longest cells. Cells also vary
greatly in their shape. They may be disc-like, polygonal, columnar, cuboid,
thread like, or even irregular. The shape of the cell may vary with the
function they perform.

8.4     PROKARYOTIC CELLS
The prokaryotic cells are represented by bacteria, blue-green algae,
mycoplasma and PPLO (Pleuro Pneumonia Like Organisms). They are
generally smaller and multiply more rapidly than the eukaryotic cells
(Figure 8.2). They may vary greatly in shape and size. The four basic
shapes of bacteria are bacillus (rod like), coccus (spherical), vibrio (comma
shaped) and spirillum (spiral).
    The organisation of the prokaryotic cell is fundamentally similar even
though prokaryotes exhibit a wide variety of shapes and functions. All
 128                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                                                    prokaryotes have a cell wall surrounding the
                                                    cell membrane except in mycoplasma. The fluid
                                                    matrix filling the cell is the cytoplasm. There is
                                                    no well-defined nucleus. The genetic material is
                               Typical bacteria     basically naked, not enveloped by a nuclear
                                   (1-2 mm)
                                                    membrane. In addition to the genomic DNA (the
                                                    single chromosome/circular DNA), many
                                                    bacteria have small circular DNA outside the
                                     PPLO           genomic DNA. These smaller DNA are called
                                (about 0.1 mm)      plasmids. The plasmid DNA confers certain
                                                    unique phenotypic characters to such bacteria.
                                                    One such character is resistance to antibiotics.
                                                    In higher classes you will learn that this plasmid
   A typical eukaryotic cell        Viruses
                                 (0.02-0.2 mm)      DNA is used to monitor bacterial transformation
          (10-20 mm)
                                                    with foreign DNA. Nuclear membrane is found
Figure 8.2 Diagram showing comparison of            in eukaryotes. No organelles, like the ones in
             eukaryotic cell with other             eukaryotes, are found in prokaryotic cells except
             organisms                              for ribosomes. Prokaryotes have something
                                                    unique in the form of inclusions. A specialised
                        differentiated form of cell membrane called mesosome is the characteristic
                        of prokaryotes. They are essentially infoldings of cell membrane.

                        8.4.1 Cell Envelope and its Modifications
                        Most prokaryotic cells, particularly the bacterial cells, have a chemically
                        complex cell envelope. The cell envelope consists of a tightly bound three
                        layered structure i.e., the outermost glycocalyx followed by the cell wall and
                        then the plasma membrane. Although each layer of the envelope performs
                        distinct function, they act together as a single protective unit. Bacteria can
                        be classified into two groups on the basis of the differences in the cell envelopes
                        and the manner in which they respond to the staining procedure developed
                        by Gram viz., those that take up the gram stain are Gram positive and the
                        others that do not are called Gram negative bacteria.
                            Glycocalyx differs in composition and thickness among different
                        bacteria. It could be a loose sheath called the slime layer in some, while
                        in others it may be thick and tough, called the capsule. The cell wall
                        determines the shape of the cell and provides a strong structural support
                        to prevent the bacterium from bursting or collapsing.
                            The plasma membrane is semi-permeable in nature and interacts with
                        the outside world. This membrane is similar structurally to that of the
                        eukaryotes.
                            A special membranous structure is the mesosome which is formed
                        by the extensions of plasma membrane into the cell. These extensions are
                        in the form of vesicles, tubules and lamellae. They help in cell wall
      CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                       129


formation, DNA replication and distribution to daughter cells. They also
help in respiration, secretion processes, to increase the surface area of
the plasma membrane and enzymatic content. In some prokaryotes like
cyanobacteria, there are other membranous extensions into the cytoplasm
called chromatophores which contain pigments.
    Bacterial cells may be motile or non-motile. If motile, they have thin
filamentous extensions from their cell wall called flagella. Bacteria show a
range in the number and arrangement of flagella. Bacterial flagellum is
composed of three parts – filament, hook and basal body. The filament
is the longest portion and extends from the cell surface to the outside.
    Besides flagella, Pili and Fimbriae are also surface structures of the
bacteria but do not play a role in motility. The pili are elongated tubular
structures made of a special protein. The fimbriae are small bristle like
fibres sprouting out of the cell. In some bacteria, they are known to help
attach the bacteria to rocks in streams and also to the host tissues.

8.4.2 Ribosomes and Inclusion Bodies
In prokaryotes, ribosomes are associated with the plasma membrane of
the cell. They are about 15 nm by 20 nm in size and are made of two
subunits - 50S and 30S units which when present together form 70S
prokaryotic ribosomes. Ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis. Several
ribosomes may attach to a single mRNA and form a chain called
polyribosomes or polysome. The ribosomes of a polysome translate the
mRNA into proteins.
    Inclusion bodies: Reserve material in prokaryotic cells are stored in
the cytoplasm in the form of inclusion bodies. These are not bound by
any membrane system and lie free in the cytoplasm, e.g., phosphate
granules, cyanophycean granules and glycogen granules. Gas vacuoles
are found in blue green and purple and green photosynthetic bacteria.


8.5     EUKARYOTIC CELLS

The eukaryotes include all the protists, plants, animals and fungi. In
eukaryotic cells there is an extensive compartmentalisation of cytoplasm
through the presence of membrane bound organelles. Eukaryotic cells
possess an organised nucleus with a nuclear envelope. In addition,
eukaryotic cells have a variety of complex locomotory and cytoskeletal
structures. Their genetic material is organised into chromosomes.
    All eukaryotic cells are not identical. Plant and animal cells are different
as the former possess cell walls, plastids and a large central vacuole which
are absent in animal cells. On the other hand, animal cells have centrioles
which are absent in almost all plant cells (Figure 8.3).
130                                                                                          BIOLOGY


                                             Rough endoplasmic
                                                 reticulum
                                       Lysosome
                     Smooth
                   endoplasmic
                    reticulum

      Plasmodesmata
                                                                   Nucleus

                                                                       Nucleolus

                                                                           Golgi
                                                                         apparatus
      Microtubule
                                                                         Nuclear
                                                                         envelope

                                                                          Plasma
                                                                         membrane

                                                                               Vacuole
                                                                            Middle lamella


                                                                  Cell wall
          (a)
                      Peroxisome                            Mitochondrion
                              Cytoplasm
                                       Chloroplast    Ribosomes

                        Golgi                                     Microvilli
                      apparatus
                                                                     Plasma
                                                                    membrane


                                                                     Centriole


                                                                       Peroxiome
          Smooth
        endoplasmic
         reticulum                                                      Lysosome
           Nuclear
           envelope                                                      Ribosomes

           Nucleolus
                                                                        Mitochondrion

                                                                         Rough
                                                                      endoplasmic
                    Nucleus                                            reticulum
            (b)                                                   Cytoplasm

                  Figure 8.3 Diagram showing : (a) Plant cell (b) Animal cell
     CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                                      131


    Let us now look at individual cell organelles to understand their
structure and functions.

8.5.1 Cell Membrane
The detailed structure of the membrane was studied only after the advent
of the electron microscope in the 1950s. Meanwhile, chemical studies on
the cell membrane, especially in human red blood cells (RBCs), enabled
the scientists to deduce the possible structure of plasma membrane.
     These studies showed that the cell membrane is composed of lipids
that are arranged in a bilayer. Also, the lipids are arranged within the
membrane with the polar head towards the outer sides and the
hydrophobic tails towards the inner part.This ensures that the nonpolar
tail of saturated hydrocarbons is protected from the aqueous environment
(Figure 8.4). The lipid component of the membrane mainly consists of
phosphoglycerides.
     Later, biochemical investigation clearly revealed that the cell membranes
also possess protein and carbohydrate. The ratio of protein and lipid varies
considerably in different cell types. In human beings, the membrane of the
erythrocyte has approximately 52 per cent protein and 40 per cent lipids.
     Depending on the ease of extraction, membrane proteins can be
classified as integral or peripheral. Peripheral proteins lie on the surface
of membrane while the integral proteins are partially or totally buried in
the membrane.

             Sugar      Protein



                                                                                 Lipid bilayer




         Cholesterol

                       Figure 8.4 Fluid mosaic model of plasma membrane
132                                                                        BIOLOGY


          An improved model of the structure of cell membrane was proposed
      by Singer and Nicolson (1972) widely accepted as fluid mosaic model
      (Figure 8.4). According to this, the quasi-fluid nature of lipid enables
      lateral movement of proteins within the overall bilayer. This ability to move
      within the membrane is measured as its fluidity.
          The fluid nature of the membrane is also important from the point of
      view of functions like cell growth, formation of intercellular junctions,
      secretion, endocytosis, cell division etc.
          One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is the
      transport of the molecules across it. The membrane is selectively permeable
      to some molecules present on either side of it. Many molecules can move
      briefly across the membrane without any requirement of energy and this
      is called the passive transport. Neutral solutes may move across the
      membrane by the process of simple diffusion along the concentration
      gradient, i.e., from higher concentration to the lower. Water may also move
      across this membrane from higher to lower concentration. Movement of
      water by diffusion is called osmosis. As the polar molecules cannot pass
      through the nonpolar lipid bilayer, they require a carrier protein of the
      membrane to facilitate their transport across the membrane. A few ions
      or molecules are transported across the membrane against their
      concentration gradient, i.e., from lower to the higher concentration. Such
      a transport is an energy dependent process, in which ATP is utilised and
      is called active transport, e.g., Na+/K+ Pump.

      8.5.2 Cell Wall
      As you may recall, a non-living rigid structure called the cell wall forms
      an outer covering for the plasma membrane of fungi and plants. Cell wall
      not only gives shape to the cell and protects the cell from mechanical
      damage and infection, it also helps in cell-to-cell interaction and provides
      barrier to undesirable macromolecules. Algae have cell wall, made of
      cellulose, galactans, mannans and minerals like calcium carbonate, while
      in other plants it consists of cellulose, hemicellulose, pectins and proteins.
      The cell wall of a young plant cell, the primary wall is capable of growth,
      which gradually diminishes as the cell matures and the secondary wall is
      formed on the inner (towards membrane) side of the cell.
          The middle lamella is a layer mainly of calcium pectate which holds
      or glues the different neighbouring cells together. The cell wall and middle
      lamellae may be traversed by plasmodesmata which connect the cytoplasm
      of neighbouring cells.

      8.5.3 Endomembrane System
      While each of the membranous organelles is distinct in terms of its
      structure and function, many of these are considered together as an
     CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                                        133


endomembrane system because their functions
are coordinated. The endomembrane system                                    Nucleus
                                                                             Nuclear pore     Rough
include endoplasmic reticulum (ER), golgi                                                   endoplasmic
complex, lysosomes and vacuoles. Since the                                                   reticulum
functions of the mitochondria, chloroplast and
peroxisomes are not coordinated with the above
components, these are not considered as part of
the endomembrane system.

8.5.3.1 The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
Electron microscopic studies of eukaryotic cells
reveal the presence of a network or reticulum of
tiny tubular structures scattered in the cytoplasm
that is called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
(Figure 8.5). Hence, ER divides the intracellular
space into two distinct compartments, i.e., luminal
(inside ER) and extra luminal (cytoplasm)
                                                                                        Ribosome
compartments.
    The ER often shows ribosomes attached to
their outer surface. The endoplasmic reticulun
bearing ribosomes on their surface is called rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER). In the absence of
ribosomes they appear smooth and are called                 Smooth
                                                          Endoplasmic
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER).                        reticulum
    RER is frequently observed in the cells actively         Figure 8.5 Endoplasmic reticulum
involved in protein synthesis and secretion. They
are extensive and continuous with the outer
                                                                Cisternae
membrane of the nucleus.
    The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is the major
site for synthesis of lipid. In animal cells lipid-like
steroidal hormones are synthesised in SER.

8.5.3.2 Golgi apparatus
Camillo Golgi (1898) first observed densely stained
reticular structures near the nucleus. These were
later named Golgi bodies after him. They consist
of many flat, disc-shaped sacs or cisternae of
0.5µm to 1.0µm diameter (Figure 8.6). These are
stacked parallel to each other. Varied number of
cisternae are present in a Golgi complex. The Golgi
cisternae are concentrically arranged near the
nucleus with distinct convex cis or the forming
face and concave trans or the maturing face.                   Figure 8.6 Golgi apparatus
134                                                                        BIOLOGY


      The cis and the trans faces of the organelle are entirely different, but
      interconnected.
          The golgi apparatus principally performs the function of packaging
      materials, to be delivered either to the intra-cellular targets or secreted
      outside the cell. Materials to be packaged in the form of vesicles from
      the ER fuse with the cis face of the golgi apparatus and move towards
      the maturing face. This explains, why the golgi apparatus remains in
      close association with the endoplasmic reticulum. A number of proteins
      synthesised by ribosomes on the endoplasmic reticulum are modified
      in the cisternae of the golgi apparatus before they are released from its
      trans face. Golgi apparatus is the important site of formation of
      glycoproteins and glycolipids.

      8.5.3.3 Lysosomes
      These are membrane bound vesicular structures formed by the process
      of packaging in the golgi apparatus. The isolated lysosomal vesicles
      have been found to be very rich in almost all types of hydrolytic
      enzymes (hydrolases – lipases, proteases, carbohydrases) optimally
      active at the acidic pH. These enzymes are capable of digesting
      carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.

      8.5.3.4 Vacuoles
      The vacuole is the membrane-bound space found in the cytoplasm. It contains
      water, sap, excretory product and other materials not useful for the cell. The
      vacuole is bound by a single membrane called tonoplast. In plant cells the
      vacuoles can occupy up to 90 per cent of the volume of the cell.
          In plants, the tonoplast facilitates the transport of a number of ions
      and other materials against concentration gradients into the vacuole, hence
      their concentration is significantly higher in the vacuole than in the
      cytoplasm.
          In Amoeba the contractile vacuole is important for excretion. In many
      cells, as in protists, food vacuoles are formed by engulfing the food
      particles.

      8.5.4 Mitochondria
      Mitochondria (sing.: mitochondrion), unless specifically stained, are not
      easily visible under the microscope. The number of mitochondria per cell
      is variable depending on the physiological activity of the cells. In terms of
      shape and size also, considerable degree of variability is observed. Typically
      it is sausage-shaped or cylindrical having a diameter of 0.2-1.0µm (average
      0.5µm) and length 1.0-4.1µm. Each mitochondrion is a double
      membrane-bound structure with the outer membrane and the inner
     CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                     135


                         Outer
                         membrane            Inter-membrane
                                      Inner       space
                                      membrane

                                          Matrix       Crista




      Figure 8.7 Structure of mitochondrion (Longitudinal section)


membrane dividing its lumen distinctly into two aqueous compartments,
i.e., the outer compartment and the inner compartment. The inner
compartment is called the matrix. The outer membrane forms the
continuous limiting boundary of the organelle. The inner membrane forms
a number of infoldings called the cristae (sing.: crista) towards the matrix
(Figure 8.7). The cristae increase the surface area. The two membranes
have their own specific enzymes associated with the mitochondrial
function. Mitochondria are the sites of aerobic respiration. They produce
cellular energy in the form of ATP, hence they are called ‘power houses’ of
the cell. The matrix also possesses single circular DNA molecule, a few
RNA molecules, ribosomes (70S) and the components required for the
synthesis of proteins. The mitochondria divide by fission.

8.5.5 Plastids
Plastids are found in all plant cells and in euglenoides. These are easily
observed under the microscope as they are large. They bear some specific
pigments, thus imparting specific colours to the plants. Based on the
type of pigments plastids can be classified into chloroplasts,
chromoplasts and leucoplasts.
    The chloroplasts contain chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments which
are responsible for trapping light energy essential for photosynthesis. In
the chromoplasts fat soluble carotenoid pigments like carotene,
xanthophylls and others are present. This gives the part of the plant a
yellow, orange or red colour. The leucoplasts are the colourless plastids
of varied shapes and sizes with stored nutrients: Amyloplasts store
carbohydrates (starch), e.g., potato; elaioplasts store oils and fats whereas
the aleuroplasts store proteins.
136                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                                         Majority of the chloroplasts of the
                                                     green plants are found in the mesophyll
                                                     cells of the leaves. These are lens-shaped,
                                                     oval, spherical, discoid or even ribbon-like
                                                     organelles having variable length
                                                     (5-10µm) and width (2-4µm). Their
                                                     number varies from 1 per cell of the
                                                     Chlamydomonas, a green alga to 20-40
                                                     per cell in the mesophyll.
                                                         Like mitochondria, the chloroplasts
                                                     are also double membrane bound. Of the
  Figure 8.8 Sectional view of chloroplast
                                                     two, the inner chloroplast membrane is
                                                     relatively less permeable. The space
                   limited by the inner membrane of the chloroplast is called the stroma. A
                   number of organised flattened membranous sacs called the thylakoids,
                   are present in the stroma (Figure 8.8). Thylakoids are arranged in stacks
                   like the piles of coins called grana (singular: granum) or the intergranal
                   thylakoids. In addition, there are flat membranous tubules called the
                   stroma lamellae connecting the thylakoids of the different grana. The
                   membrane of the thylakoids enclose a space called a lumen. The stroma
                   of the chloroplast contains enzymes required for the synthesis of
                   carbohydrates and proteins. It also contains small, double-stranded
                   circular DNA molecules and ribosomes. Chlorophyll pigments are
                   present in the thylakoids. The ribosomes of the chloroplasts are smaller
                   (70S) than the cytoplasmic ribosomes (80S).


                    8.5.6 Ribosomes
                    Ribosomes are the granular structures first observed under the electron
                    microscope as dense particles by George Palade (1953). They are
                    composed of ribonucleic acid (RNA) and proteins and are not surrounded
                    by any membrane.
                         The eukaryotic ribosomes are 80S while the prokaryotic ribosomes
                    are 70S. Here ‘S’ (Svedberg’s Unit) stands for the sedimentation coefficient;
                    it indirectly is a measure of density and size. Both 70S and 80S ribosomes
                    are composed of two subunits.


                    8.5.7 Cytoskeleton
                    An elaborate network of filamentous proteinaceous structures present in
                    the cytoplasm is collectively referred to as the cytoskeleton. The
                    cytoskeleton in a cell are involved in many functions such as mechanical
                    support, motility, maintenance of the shape of the cell.
     CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                                       137


                                                                      Plasma
                                                                      membrane

                                                                             Peripheral
                                                                             microtubules
                                                                             (doublets)
                                   Central
                                   sheath
                                                                                 Interdoublet
                                                                                 bridge




                                                                        Central
                                               Radial                   microtuble
            (a)                                             (b)
                                               spoke

      Figure 8.9    Section of cilia/flagella showing different parts : (a) Electron micrograph
                    (b) Diagrammatic representation of internal structure


8.5.8 Cilia and Flagella
Cilia (sing.: cilium) and flagella (sing.: flagellum) are hair-like outgrowths
of the cell membrane. Cilia are small structures which work like oars,
causing the movement of either the cell or the surrounding fluid. Flagella
are comparatively longer and responsible for cell movement. The
prokaryotic bacteria also possess flagella but these are structurally
different from that of the eukaryotic flagella.
    The electron microscopic study of a cilium or the flagellum show that
they are covered with plasma membrane. Their core called the axoneme,
possesses a number of microtubules running parallel to the long axis.
The axoneme usually has nine pairs of doublets of radially arranged
peripheral microtubules, and a pair of centrally located microtubules.
Such an arrangement of axonemal microtubules is referred to as the 9+2
array (Figure 8.9). The central tubules are connected by bridges and is
also enclosed by a central sheath, which is connected to one of the tubules
of each peripheral doublets by a radial spoke. Thus, there are nine radial
spokes. The peripheral doublets are also interconnected by linkers. Both
the cilium and flagellum emerge from centriole-like structure called the
basal bodies.

8.5.9 Centrosome and Centrioles
Centrosome is an organelle usually containing two cylindrical structures
called centrioles. They are surrounded by amorphous pericentriolar
materials. Both the centrioles in a centrosome lie perpendicular to each
other in which each has an organisation like the cartwheel. They are
138                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                   made up of nine evenly spaced peripheral fibrils of tubulin protein. Each
                   of the peripheral fibril is a triplet.The adjacent triplets are also linked.
                   The central part of the proximal region of the centriole is also proteinaceous
                   and called the hub, which is connected with tubules of the peripheral
                   triplets by radial spokes made of protein. The centrioles form the basal
                   body of cilia or flagella, and spindle fibres that give rise to spindle
                   apparatus during cell division in animal cells.

                   8.5.10 Nucleus
                 Nucleus as a cell organelle was first described by Robert Brown as early
                 as 1831. Later the material of the nucleus stained by the basic dyes was
                 given the name chromatin by Flemming.
                                                      The interphase nucleus (nucleus of a
                                                  cell when it is not dividing) has highly
                                                  extended and elaborate nucleoprotein
                                                  fibres called chromatin, nuclear matrix and
                                 Nucleoplasm      one or more spherical bodies called
                                                  nucleoli (sing.: nucleolus) (Figure 8.10).
                                                  Electron microscopy has revealed that the
                                  Nucleolus
                                                  nuclear envelope, which consists of two
                                  Nuclear pore
                                                  parallel membranes with a space between
                                                  (10 to 50 nm) called the perinuclear space,
                                  Nuclear         forms a barrier between the materials
                                  membrane
                                                  present inside the nucleus and that of the
                                                  cytoplasm. The outer membrane usually
 Figure 8.10 Structure of nucleus                 remains continuous with the endoplasmic
                                                  reticulum and also bears ribosomes on it.
                 At a number of places the nuclear envelope is interrupted by minute
                 pores, which are formed by the fusion of its two membranes. These nuclear
                 pores are the passages through which movement of RNA and protein
                 molecules takes place in both directions between the nucleus and the
                 cytoplasm. Normally, there is only one nucleus per cell, variations in the
                 number of nuclei are also frequently observed. Can you recollect names
                 of organisms that have more than one nucleus per cell? Some mature
                 cells even lack nucleus, e.g., erythrocytes of many mammals and sieve
                 tube cells of vascular plants. Would you consider these cells as ‘living’?
                     The nuclear matrix or the nucleoplasm contains nucleolus and
                 chromatin. The nucleoli are spherical structures present in the
                 nucleoplasm. The content of nucleolus is continuous with the rest of the
                 nucleoplasm as it is not a membrane bound structure. It is a site for
                 active ribosomal RNA synthesis. Larger and more numerous nucleoli are
                 present in cells actively carrying out protein synthesis.
     CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                               139


     You may recall that the interphase nucleus has a loose
and indistinct network of nucleoprotein fibres called
chromatin. But during different stages of cell division, cells
show structured chromosomes in place of the nucleus.
Chromatin contains DNA and some basic proteins called
histones, some non-histone proteins and also RNA. A
single human cell has approximately two metre long
thread of DNA distributed among its forty six (twenty three
pairs) chromosomes. You will study the details of DNA
packaging in the form of a chromosome in class XII.                                  Kinetochore
     Every chromosome essentially has a primary
constriction or the centromere on the sides of which disc
shaped structures called kinetochores are present
(Figure 8.11). Based on the position of the centromere,
the chromosomes can be classified into four types (Figure
8.12). The metacentric chromosome has middle
centromere forming two equal arms of the chromosome.
The sub-metacentric chromosome has centromere
slightly away from the middle of the chromosome resulting
into one shorter arm and one longer arm. In case of              Figure 8.11 Chromosome with
acrocentric chromosome the centromere is situated close                      kinetochore
to its end forming one extremely short and one very long
arm, whereas the telocentric chromosome has a terminal
centromere.




             Figure 8.12 Types of chromosomes based on the position of centromere
140                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                           Sometimes a few chromosomes have non-staining secondary
                       constrictions at a constant location. This gives the appearance of a small
                       fragment called the satellite.

                       8.5.11 Microbodies
                       Many membrane bound minute vesicles called microbodies that contain
                       various enzymes, are present in both plant and animal cells.




                                           SUMMARY

      All organisms are made of cells or aggregates of cells. Cells vary in their shape, size
      and activities/functions. Based on the presence or absence of a membrane bound
      nucleus and other organelles, cells and hence organisms can be named as
      eukaryotic or prokaryotic.
          A typical eukaryotic cell consists of a cell membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm.
      Plant cells have a cell wall outside the cell membrane. The plasma membrane is
      selectively permeable and facilitates transport of several molecules. The
      endomembrane system includes ER, golgi complex, lysosomes and vacuoles. All
      the cell organelles perform different but specific functions. Centrosome and centriole
      form the basal body of cilia and flagella that facilitate locomotion. In animal cells,
      centrioles also form spindle apparatus during cell division. Nucleus contains
      nucleoli and chromatin network. It not only controls the activities of organelles
      but also plays a major role in heredity.
          Endoplasmic reticulum contains tubules or cisternae. They are of two types:
      rough and smooth. ER helps in the transport of substances, synthesis of
      proteins, lipoproteins and glycogen. The golgi body is a membranous organelle
      composed of flattened sacs. The secretions of cells are packed in them and
      transported from the cell. L ysosomes are single membrane structures
      containing enzymes for digestion of all types of macromolecules. Ribosomes
      are involved in protein synthesis. These occur freely in the cytoplasm or are
      associated with ER. Mitochondria help in oxidative phosphorylation and
      generation of adenosine triphosphate. They are bound by double membrane;
      the outer membrane is smooth and inner one folds into several cristae. Plastids
      are pigment containing organelles found in plant cells only. In plant cells,
      chloroplasts are responsible for trapping light energy essential for
      photosynthesis. The grana, in the plastid, is the site of light reactions and the
      stroma of dark reactions. The green coloured plastids are chloroplasts, which
      contain chlorophyll, whereas the other coloured plastids are chromoplasts,
      which may contain pigments like carotene and xanthophyll. The nucleus is
      enclosed by nuclear envelope, a double membrane structure with nuclear pores.
      The inner membrane encloses the nucleoplasm and the chromatin material.
      Thus, cell is the structural and functional unit of life.
CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE                                                                       141


                                          EXERCISES

   1.   Which of the following is not correct?
        (a)   Robert Brown discovered the cell.
        (b)   Schleiden and Schwann formulated the cell theory.
        (c)   Virchow explained that cells are formed from pre-existing cells.
        (d)   A unicellular organism carries out its life activities within a single cell.
   2.   New cells generate from
        (a) bacterial fermentation          (b) regeneration of old cells
        (c) pre-existing cells              (d) abiotic materials
   3.   Match the following
            Column I                           Column II
        (a) Cristae                        (i) Flat membranous sacs in stroma
        (b) Cisternae                     (ii) Infoldings in mitochondria
        (c) Thylakoids                   (iii) Disc-shaped sacs in Golgi apparatus
   4.   Which of the following is correct:
        (a)   Cells of all living organisms have a nucleus.
        (b)   Both animal and plant cells have a well defined cell wall.
        (c)   In prokaryotes, there are no membrane bound organelles.
        (d)   Cells are formed de novo from abiotic materials.
   5.   What is a mesosome in a prokaryotic cell? Mention the functions that it performs.
   6.   How do neutral solutes move across the plasma membrane? Can the polar
        molecules also move across it in the same way? If not, then how are these
        transported across the membrane?
   7.   Name two cell-organelles that are double membrane bound. What are the
        characteristics of these two organelles? State their functions and draw labelled
        diagrams of both.
   8.   What are the characteristics of prokaryotic cells?
   9.   Multicellular organisms have division of labour. Explain.
  10. Cell is the basic unit of life. Discuss in brief.
  11. What are nuclear pores? State their function.
  12. Both lysosomes and vacuoles are endomembrane structures, yet they differ in
      terms of their functions. Comment.
  13. Describe the structure of the following with the help of labelled diagrams.
        (i) Nucleus          (ii) Centrosome
  14. What is a centromere? How does the position of centromere form the basis of
      classification of chromosomes. Support your answer with a diagram showing
      the position of centromere on different types of chromosomes.
 206                                                                                       BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 13
                            PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
13.1 What do we      All animals including human beings depend on plants for their food. Have
     Know?           you ever wondered from where plants get their food? Green plants, in
13.2 Early           fact, have to make or rather synthesise the food they need and all other
     Experiments     organisms depend on them for their needs. Green plants carry out
                     ‘photosynthesis’, a physico-chemical process by which they use light
13.3 Where does      energy to drive the synthesis of organic compounds. Ultimately, all living
     Photosynthesis forms on earth depend on sunlight for energy. The use of energy from
     take place?
                     sunlight by plants doing photosynthesis is the basis of life on earth.
13.4 How many        Photosynthesis is important due to two reasons: it is the primary source
     Pigments are    of all food on earth. It is also responsible for the release of oxygen into the
     involved in     atmosphere by green plants. Have you ever thought what would happen
     Photosynthesis? if there were no oxygen to breath? This chapter focusses on the structure
13.5 What is Light   of the photosynthetic machinery and the various reactions that transform
     Reaction?       light energy into chemical energy.

13.6 The Electron
     Transport         13.1 WHAT DO WE KNOW?
13.7 Where are the    Let us try to find out what we already know about photosynthesis. Some
      ATP and NADPH
                      simple experiments you may have done in the earlier classes have shown
      Used?
                      that chlorophyll (green pigment of the leaf), light and CO2 are required for
13.8 The C4 Pathway photosynthesis to occur.
13.9 Photorespiration     You may have carried out the experiment to look for starch formation
                      in two leaves – a variegated leaf or a leaf that was partially covered with
13.10 Factors
                      black paper, and one that was exposed to light. On testing these leaves
      affecting
                      for starch it was clear that photosynthesis occurred only in the green
      Photosynthesis
                      parts of the leaves in the presence of light.
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                       207


    Another experiment you may have carried out
is the half-leaf experiment, where a part of a leaf is
enclosed in a test tube containing some KOH soaked
cotton (which absorbs CO2), while the other half is
exposed to air. The setup is then placed in light for
some time. On testing for starch later in the two
halves of the leaf, you must have found that the
exposed part of the leaf tested positive for starch
while the portion that was in the tube, tested
negative. This showed that CO2 was required for
photosynthesis. Can you explain how this
conclusion could be drawn?                                  (a)                      (b)

13.2 EARLY EXPERIMENTS

It is interesting to learn about those simple
experiments that led to a gradual development in
our understanding of photosynthesis.
    Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) in 1770
performed a series of experiments that revealed the
essential role of air in the growth of green plants.
Priestley, you may recall, discovered oxygen in
1774. Priestley observed that a candle burning in
a closed space – a bell jar, soon gets extinguished
(Figure 13.1 a, b, c, d). Similarly, a mouse would
                                                             (c)                      (d)
soon suffocate in a closed space. He concluded that
                                                          Figure 13.1 Priestley’s experiment
a burning candle or an animal that breathe the air,
both somehow, damage the air. But when he placed a mint plant in the
same bell jar, he found that the mouse stayed alive and the candle
continued to burn. Priestley hypothesised as follows: Plants restore to
the air whatever breathing animals and burning candles remove.
    Can you imagine how Priestley would have conducted the experiment
using a candle and a plant? Remember, he would need to rekindle the
candle to test whether it burns after a few days. How many different
ways can you think of to light the candle without disturbing the set-up?
    Using a similar setup as the one used by Priestley, but by placing it
once in the dark and once in the sunlight, Jan Ingenhousz (1730-1799)
showed that sunlight is essential to the plant process that somehow
purifies the air fouled by burning candles or breathing animals.
Ingenhousz in an elegant experiment with an aquatic plant showed that
in bright sunlight, small bubbles were formed around the green parts
while in the dark they did not. Later he identified these bubbles to be of
oxygen. Hence he showed that it is only the green part of the plants that
could release oxygen.
208                                                                      BIOLOGY


          It was not until about 1854 that Julius von Sachs provided evidence
      for production of glucose when plants grow. Glucose is usually stored as
      starch. His later studies showed that the green substance in plants
      (chlorophyll as we know it now) is located in special bodies (later called
      chloroplasts) within plant cells. He found that the green parts in plants is
      where glucose is made, and that the glucose is usually stored as starch.
          Now consider the interesting experiments done by T.W Engelmann
      (1843 – 1909). Using a prism he split light into its spectral components
      and then illuminated a green alga, Cladophora, placed in a suspension
      of aerobic bacteria. The bacteria were used to detect the sites of O2
      evolution. He observed that the bacteria accumulated mainly in the region
      of blue and red light of the split spectrum. A first action spectrum of
      photosynthesis was thus described. It resembles roughly the absorption
      spectra of chlorophyll a and b (discussed in section 13.4).
          By the middle of the nineteenth century the key features of plant
      photosynthesis were known, namely, that plants could use light energy
      to make carbohydrates from CO2 and water. The empirical equation
      representing the total process of photosynthesis for oxygen evolving
      organisms was then understood as:

                                      Light
                          CO2 + H2 O   → [CH2 O] + O2

      where [CH2O] represented a carbohydrate (e.g., glucose, a six-carbon
      sugar).
          A milestone contribution to the understanding of photosynthesis was
      that made by a microbiologist, Cornelius van Niel (1897-1985), who,
      based on his studies of purple and green bacteria, demonstrated that
      photosynthesis is essentially a light-dependent reaction in which
      hydrogen from a suitable oxidisable compound reduces carbon dioxide
      to carbohydrates. This can be expressed by:

                                   Light
                      2H2 A + CO2   → 2 A + CH2 O + H2 O

          In green plants H2O is the hydrogen donor and is oxidised to O2. Some
      organisms do not release O2 during photosynthesis. When H2S, instead
      is the hydrogen donor for purple and green sulphur bacteria, the
      ‘oxidation’ product is sulphur or sulphate depending on the organism
      and not O2. Hence, he inferred that the O2 evolved by the green plant
      comes from H2O, not from carbon dioxide. This was later proved by using
      radioisotopic techniques. The correct equation, that would represent the
      overall process of photosynthesis is therefore:

                                  Light
                    6CO2 +12H2 O   → C6 H12O6 + 6H2O + 6O2

      where C6 H12 O6 represents glucose. The O2 released is from water; this
      was proved using radio isotope techniques. Note that this is not a single
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                               209


reaction but description of a multistep process called photosynthesis.
Can you explain why twelve molecules of water as substrate are used
in the equation given above?

13.3 WHERE DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS TAKE PLACE?
You would of course answer: in ‘the green leaf’ or you may add, ‘in the
chloroplasts’ based on what you earlier read in Chapter 8. You are
definitely right. Photosynthesis does take place in the green leaves of plants
but it does so also in other green parts of the plants. Can you name some
other parts where you think photosynthesis may occur?
     You would recollect from previous unit that the mesophyll cells in the
leaves, have a large number of chloroplasts. Usually the chloroplasts align
themselves along the walls of the mesophyll cells, such that they get the
optimum quantity of the incident light. When do you think the
chloroplasts will be aligned with their flat surfaces parallel to the walls?
When would they be perpendicular to the incident light?
     You have studied the structure of chloroplast in Chapter 8. Within
the chloroplast there is the membranous system consisting of grana, the
stroma lamellae, and the fluid stroma (Figure 13.2). There is a clear division
of labour within the chloroplast. The membrane system is responsible for
trapping the light energy and also for the synthesis of ATP and NADPH.
In stroma, enzymatic reactions incorporate CO2 into the plant leading to
the synthesis of sugar, which in turn forms starch. The former set of
reactions, since they are directly light driven are called light reactions.
The latter are not directly light driven but are dependent on the products
of light reactions (ATP and NADPH). Hence, to distinguish the latter they
are called, by convention, as dark reactions. However, this should not be
construed to mean that they occur in darkness or that they are not light-
dependent.
                                                                                 Outer membrane
                                                                                 Inner membrane

                                                                                 Stromal lamella

                                                                                 Grana


                                                                                 Stroma
                                                                                 Ribosomes


                                                                                 Starch granule

                                                                                 Lipid droplet

       Figure 13.2 Diagrammatic representation of an electron micrograph of a section of
                   chloroplast
 210                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                                13.4 HOW MANY PIGMENTS ARE INVOLVED
                                                     IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS?

                                                Looking at plants have you ever wondered why
                                                and how there are so many shades of green in
                                                their leaves – even in the same plant? We can
                                                look for an answer to this question by trying to
                                                separate the leaf pigments of any green plant
                                                through      paper      chromatography.          A
                                                chromatographic separation of the leaf pigments
                                                shows that the colour that we see in leaves is
                                                not due to a single pigment but due to four
                                                pigments: Chlorophyll a (bright or blue green
                                                in the chromatogram), chlorophyll b (yellow
                                                green), xanthophylls (yellow) and carotenoids
                                                (yellow to yellow-orange). Let us now see what
                                                roles various pigments play in photosynthesis.
                                                    Pigments are substances that have an ability
                                                to absorb light, at specific wavelengths. Can you
                                                guess which is the most abundant plant
                                                pigment in the world? Let us study the graph
                                                showing the ability of chlorophyll a pigment to
                                                absorb lights of different wavelengths (Figure
                                                13.3 a). Of course, you are familiar with the
                                                wavelength of the visible spectrum of light as
                                                well as the VIBGYOR.
                                                    From Figure 13.3a can you determine the
                                                wavelength (colour of light) at which chlorophyll
                                                a shows the maximum absorption? Does it
                                                show another absorption peak at any other
                                                wavelengths too? If yes, which one?
                                                    Now look at Figure 13.3b showing the
                                                wavelengths at which maximum photosynthesis
                                                occurs in a plant. Can you see that the
                                                wavelengths at which there is maximum
                                                absorption by chlorophyll a, i.e., in the blue and
Figure 13.3a Graph showing the absorption
                                                the red regions, also shows higher rate of
             spectrum of chlorophyll a, b and   photosynthesis. Hence, we can conclude that
             the carotenoids                    chlorophyll a is the chief pigment associated
Figure 13.3b Graph     showing        action    with photosynthesis. But by looking at Figure
             spectrum of photosynthesis         13.3c can you say that there is a complete
Figure 13.3c Graph     showing        action
                                                one-to-one overlap between the absorption
             spectrum of photosynthesis
             superimposed on absorption         spectrum of chlorophyll a and the action
             spectrum of chlorophyll a          spectrum of photosynthesis?
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                       211


    These graphs, together, show that most of the photosynthesis takes
place in the blue and red regions of the spectrum; some photosynthesis
does take place at the other wavelengths of the visible spectrum. Let us
see how this happens. Though chlorophyll is the major pigment
responsible for trapping light, other thylakoid pigments like chlorophyll
b, xanthophylls and carotenoids, which are called accessory pigments,
also absorb light and transfer the energy to chlorophyll a. Indeed, they
not only enable a wider range of wavelength of incoming light to be utilised
for photosyntesis but also protect chlorophyll a from photo-oxidation.


13.5 WHAT       IS   LIGHT REACTION?

Light reactions or the ‘Photochemical’ phase
include light absorption, water splitting, oxygen
release, and the formation of high-energy                       Primary acceptor
chemical intermediates, ATP and NADPH.
Several complexes are involved in the process.
The pigments are organised into two discrete
photochemical light harvesting complexes
(LHC) within the Photosystem I (PS I) and                                     Reaction
                                                   Photon
Photosystem II (PS II). These are named in                                    centre
the sequence of their discovery, and not in the
sequence in which they function during the light
reaction. The LHC are made up of hundreds of                                           Pigment
                                                                                       molecules
pigment molecules bound to proteins. Each
photosystem has all the pigments (except one
molecule of chlorophyll a) forming a light
harvesting system also called antennae (Figure
                                                    Figure 13.4 The light harvesting complex
13.4). These pigments help to make
photosynthesis more efficient by absorbing
different wavelengths of light. The single chlorophyll a molecule forms
the reaction centre. The reaction centre is different in both the
photosystems. In PS I the reaction centre chlorophyll a has an absorption
peak at 700 nm, hence is called P700, while in PS II it has absorption
maxima at 680 nm, and is called P680.


13.6 THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT

In photosystem II the reaction centre chlorophyll a absorbs 680 nm
wavelength of red light causing electrons to become excited and jump
into an orbit farther from the atomic nucleus. These electrons are picked
up by an electron acceptor which passes them to an electrons transport
 212                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                                                     system consisting of cytochromes (Figure
       Photosystem II   Photosystem I                13.5). This movement of electrons is downhill,
                                                     in terms of an oxidation-reduction or redox
                          e- acceptor         NADPH potential scale. The electrons are not used up
Light e- acceptor
                  ADP+iP     ATP              NADP + as they pass through the electron transport
                                                     chain, but are passed on to the pigments of
                   Electron                          photosystem PS I. Simultaneously, electrons
                  transport                          in the reaction centre of PS I are also excited
                   system
                                                     when they receive red light of wavelength 700
                                                     nm and are transferred to another accepter
                                                     molecule that has a greater redox potential.
                               LHC
                                                     These electrons then are moved downhill
                                                     again, this time to a molecule of energy-rich
          LHC                                        NADP+. The addition of these electrons reduces
                      H2O        2e- + 2H+ + [O]     NADP+ to NADPH + H+. This whole scheme of
                                                     transfer of electrons, starting from the PS II,
    Figure 13.5 Z scheme of light reaction           uphill to the acceptor, down the electron
                                                     transport chain to PS I, excitation of electrons,
                        transfer to another acceptor, and finally down hill to NADP+ causing it to
                        be reduced to NADPH + H+ is called the Z scheme, due to its characterstic
                        shape (Figure 13.5). This shape is formed when all the carriers are placed
                        in a sequence on a redox potential scale.

                        13.6.1 Splitting of Water
                        You would then ask, How does PS II supply electrons continuously? The
                        electrons that were moved from photosystem II must be replaced. This is
                        achieved by electrons available due to splitting of water. The splitting of
                        water is associated with the PS II; water is split into H+, [O] and electrons.
                        This creates oxygen, one of the net products of photosynthesis. The
                        electrons needed to replace those removed from photosystem I are provided
                        by photosystem II.

                                                2H2 O → 4H + + O2 + 4e−

                            We need to emphasise here that the water splitting complex is associated
                        with the PS II, which itself is physically located on the inner side of the
                        membrane of the thylakoid. Then, where are the protons and O2 formed
                        likely to be released – in the lumen? or on the outer side of the membrane?

                        13.6.2 Cyclic and Non-cyclic Photo-phosphorylation
                        Living organisms have the capability of extracting energy from oxidisable
                        substances and store this in the form of bond energy. Special substances like
                        ATP, carry this energy in their chemical bonds. The process through which
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                        213


ATP is synthesised by cells (in mitochondria and
chloroplasts) is named phosphorylation. Photo-                                  Photosystem I
phosphorylation is the synthesis of ATP from
ADP and inorganic phosphate in the presence of
                                                                                 e - acceptor
light. When the two photosystems work in a
series, first PS II and then the PS I, a process called Light




                                                                        A TP
non-cyclic photo-phosphorylation occurs. The




                                                                        P
two photosystems are connected through an




                                                                    P+i
                                                                          Electron




                                                                 AD
electron transport chain, as seen earlier – in the                       transport
Z scheme. Both ATP and NADPH + H + are                                     system
synthesised by this kind of electron flow (Figure
13.5).
    When only PS I is functional, the electron is                                Chlorophyll
circulated within the photosystem and the                                            P 700
phosphorylation occurs due to cyclic flow of
electrons (Figure 13.6). A possible location             Figure 13.6 Cyclic photophosphorylation
where this could be happening is in the stroma
lamellae. While the membrane or lamellae of the grana have both PS I
and PS II the stroma lamellae membranes lack PS II as well as NADP
reductase enzyme. The excited electron does not pass on to NADP+ but is
cycled back to the PS I complex through the electron transport chain
(Figure 13.6). The cyclic flow hence, results only in the synthesis of ATP,
but not of NADPH + H+. Cyclic photophosphorylation also occurs when
only light of wavelengths beyond 680 nm are available for excitation.

13.6.3 Chemiosmotic Hypothesis
Let us now try and understand how actually ATP is synthesised in the
chloroplast. The chemiosmotic hypothesis has been put forward to explain
the mechanism. Like in respiration, in photosynthesis too, ATP synthesis is
linked to development of a proton gradient across a membrane. This time
these are membranes of the thylakoid. There is one difference though, here
the proton accumulation is towards the inside of the membrane, i.e., in the
lumen. In respiration, protons accumulate in the intermembrane space of
the mitochondria when electrons move through the ETS (Chapter 14).
    Let us understand what causes the proton gradient across the
membrane. We need to consider again the processes that take place during
the activation of electrons and their transport to determine the steps that
cause a proton gradient to develop (Figure 13.7).
(a) Since splitting of the water molecule takes place on the inner side of
    the membrane, the protons or hydrogen ions that are produced by
    the splitting of water accumulate within the lumen of the thylakoids.
214                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                                +
                                            H
                                                                            +
                                                                        NADP


                                                                                NADPH
                    Photosystem      Cytochromes              Photosystem
                         II              b&f                       I




                                                +
                                        +
                                            H            +
                                    H           +
                                                    H
                                            H                           Lumen

                                                    F0
      Thylakoid
      membrane


                   Stroma
                                                             F1
                                     ATP synthase
                            ADP                                   ATP

                  Figure 13.7 ATP synthesis through chemiosmosis


                  (b) As electrons move through the photosystems, protons are transported
                      across the membrane. This happens because the primary accepter of
                      electron which is located towards the outer side of the membrane
                      transfers its electron not to an electron carrier but to an H carrier.
                      Hence, this molecule removes a proton from the stroma while
                      transporting an electron. When this molecule passes on its electron
                      to the electron carrier on the inner side of the membrane, the proton
                      is released into the inner side or the lumen side of the membrane.
                  (c) The NADP reductase enzyme is located on the stroma side of the
                      membrane. Along with electrons that come from the acceptor of
                      electrons of PS I, protons are necessary for the reduction of NADP+ to
                      NADPH+ H+. These protons are also removed from the stroma.
                      Hence, within the chloroplast, protons in the stroma decrease in
                  number, while in the lumen there is accumulation of protons. This creates
                  a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane as well as a measurable
                  decrease in pH in the lumen.
                      Why are we so interested in the proton gradient? This gradient is
                  important because it is the breakdown of this gradient that leads to release
                  of energy. The gradient is broken down due to the movement of protons
                  across the membrane to the stroma through the transmembrane channel
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                           215


of the F0 of the ATPase. The ATPase enzyme consists of two parts: one
called the F0 is embedded in the membrane and forms a transmembrane
channel that carries out facilitated diffusion of protons across the
membrane. The other portion is called F1 and protrudes on the outer
surface of the thylakoid membrane on the side that faces the stroma. The
break down of the gradient provides enough energy to cause a
conformational change in the F1 particle of the ATPase, which makes the
enzyme synthesise several molecules of energy-packed ATP.
    Chemiosmosis requires a membrane, a proton pump, a proton
gradient and ATPase. Energy is used to pump protons across a membrane,
to create a gradient or a high concentration of protons within the thylakoid
lumen. ATPase has a channel that allows diffusion of protons back across
the membrane; this releases enough energy to activate ATPase enzyme
that catalyses the formation of ATP.
    Along with the NADPH produced by the movement of electrons, the
ATP will be used immediately in the biosynthetic reaction taking place in
the stroma, responsible for fixing CO2, and synthesis of sugars.


13.7 WHERE ARE THE ATP AND NADPH USED?

We learnt that the products of light reaction are ATP, NADPH and O2. Of
these O2 diffuses out of the chloroplast while ATP and NADPH are used to
drive the processes leading to the synthesis of food, more accurately,
sugars. This is the biosynthetic phase of photosynthesis. This process
does not directly depend on the presence of light but is dependent on the
products of the light reaction, i.e., ATP and NADPH, besides CO2 and
H2O. You may wonder how this could be verified; it is simple: immediately
after light becomes unavailable, the biosynthetic process continues for
some time, and then stops. If then, light is made available, the synthesis
starts again.
    Can we, hence, say that calling the biosynthetic phase as the dark
reaction is a misnomer? Discuss this amongst yourselves.
    Let us now see how the ATP and NADPH are used in the biosynthetic
phase. We saw earlier that CO2 is combined with H2O to produce (CH2O)n
or sugars. It was of interest to scientists to find out how this reaction
proceeded, or rather what was the first product formed when CO2 is taken
into a reaction or fixed. Just after world war II, among the several efforts
to put radioisotopes to beneficial use, the work of Melvin Calvin is
exemplary. The use of radioactive 14C by him in algal photosynthesis
studies led to the discovery that the first CO2 fixation product was a
3-carbon organic acid. He also contributed to working out the complete
biosynthetic pathway; hence it was called Calvin cycle after him. The
first product identified was 3-phosphoglyceric acid or in short PGA.
How many carbon atoms does it have?
216                                                                       BIOLOGY


          Scientists also tried to know whether all plants have PGA as the first
      product of CO2 fixation, or whether any other product was formed in
      other plants. Experiments conducted over a wide range of plants led to
      the discovery of another group of plants, where the first stable product of
      CO2 fixation was again an organic acid, but one which had 4 carbon
      atoms in it. This acid was identified to be oxaloacetic acid or OAA. Since
      then CO2 assimilation during photosynthesis was said to be of two main
      types: those plants in which the first product of CO2 fixation is a C3 acid
      (PGA), i.e., the C3 pathway, and those in which the first product was a C4
      acid (OAA), i.e., the C4 pathway. These two groups of plants showed
      other associated characteristics that we will discuss later.

      13.7.1 The Primary Acceptor of CO2
      Let us now ask ourselves a question that was asked by the scientists who
      were struggling to understand the ‘dark reaction’. How many carbon atoms
      would a molecule have which after accepting (fixing) CO2, would have 3
      carbons (of PGA)?
          The studies very unexpectedly showed that the acceptor molecule
      was a 5-carbon ketose sugar – ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). Did any
      of you think of this possibility? Do not worry; the scientists also took
      a long time and conducted many experiments to reach this conclusion.
      They also believed that since the first product was a C3 acid, the primary
      acceptor would be a 2-carbon compound; they spent many years trying
      to identify a 2-carbon compound before they discovered the 5-carbon
      RuBP.

      13.7.2 The Calvin Cycle
      Calvin and his co-workers then worked out the whole pathway and showed
      that the pathway operated in a cyclic manner; the RuBP was regenerated.
      Let us now see how the Calvin pathway operates and where the sugar is
      synthesised. Let us at the outset understand very clearly that the Calvin
      pathway occurs in all photosynthetic plants; it does not matter whether
      they have C3 or C4 (or any other) pathways (Figure 13.8).
          For ease of understanding, the Calvin cycle can be described under
      three stages: carboxylation, reduction and regeneration.
      1. Carboxylation – Carboxylation is the fixation of CO2 into a stable organic
         intermediate. Carboxylation is the most crucial step of the Calvin cycle
         where CO2 is utilised for the carboxylation of RuBP. This reaction is
         catalysed by the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which results in the formation
         of two molecules of 3-PGA. Since this enzyme also has an oxygenation
         activity it would be more correct to call it RuBP carboxylase-oxygenase
         or RuBisCO.
    PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                            217


                                                                Atmosphere



                                       Ribulose-1,5-           C02 + H2O
                                       bisphosphate


                                                           Carboxylation
               ADP




               Regeneration
                                                             3-phosphoglycerate




               ATP
                                                                              ATP
                                                            Reduction          +
                                                                             NADPH

                                           Triose
                                         phosphate
                                                                    ADP
                                                                      +
                                                                 Pi +NADP+


                                       Sucrose, starch

     Figure 13.8 The Calvin cycle proceeds in three stages : (1) carboxylation, during which
                 CO2 combines with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate; (2) reduction, during which
                 carbohydrate is formed at the expense of the photochemically made ATP
                 and NADPH; and (3) regeneration during which the CO2 acceptor ribulose-
                 1,5-bisphosphate is formed again so that the cycle continues


2. Reduction – These are a series of reactions that lead to the formation
   of glucose. The steps involve utilisation of 2 molecules of ATP for
   phosphorylation and two of NADPH for reduction per CO2 molecule
   fixed. The fixation of six molecules of CO2 and 6 turns of the cycle are
   required for the removal of one molecule of glucose from the pathway.
3. Regeneration – Regeneration of the CO2 acceptor molecule RuBP is
   crucial if the cycle is to continue uninterrupted. The regeneration
   steps require one ATP for phosphorylation to form RuBP.
218                                                                        BIOLOGY


          Hence for every CO2 molecule entering the Calvin cycle, 3 molecules
      of ATP and 2 of NADPH are required. It is probably to meet this difference
      in number of ATP and NADPH used in the dark reaction that the cyclic
      phosphorylation takes place.
          To make one molecule of glucose 6 turns of the cycle are required.
      Work out how many ATP and NADPH molecules will be required to make
      one molecule of glucose through the Calvin pathway.
          It might help you to understand all of this if we look at what goes in
      and what comes out of the Calvin cycle.

                             In                Out

                          Six CO2           One glucose
                          18 ATP            18 ADP
                          12 NADPH          12 NADP


      13.8 THE C4 PATHWAY

      Plants that are adapted to dry tropical regions have the C4 pathway
      mentioned earlier. Though these plants have the C4 oxaloacetic acid as
      the first CO2 fixation product they use the C3 pathway or the Calvin cycle
      as the main biosynthetic pathway. Then, in what way are they different
      from C3 plants? This is a question that you may reasonably ask.
          C4 plants are special: They have a special type of leaf anatomy, they
      tolerate higher temperatures, they show a response to high light intensities,
      they lack a process called photorespiration and have greater productivity
      of biomass. Let us understand these one by one.
          Study vertical sections of leaves, one of a C3 plant and the other of a C4
      plant. Do you notice the differences? Do both have the same types of
      mesophylls? Do they have similar cells around the vascular bundle sheath?
          The particularly large cells around the vascular bundles of the C4
      pathway plants are called bundle sheath cells, and the leaves which
      have such anatomy are said to have ‘Kranz’ anatomy. ‘Kranz’ means
      ‘wreath’ and is a reflection of the arrangement of cells. The bundle sheath
      cells may form several layers around the vascular bundles; they are
      characterised by having a large number of chloroplasts, thick walls
      impervious to gaseous exchange and no intercellular spaces. You may
      like to cut a section of the leaves of C4 plants – maize or sorghum – to
      observe the Kranz anatomy and the distribution of mesophyll cells.
          It would be interesting for you to collect leaves of diverse species of
      plants around you and cut vertical sections of the leaves. Observe under
      the microscope – look for the bundle sheath around the vascular
      bundles. The presence of the bundle sheath would help you identify
      the C4 plants.
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                    219


    Now study the pathway shown in Figure 13.9. This pathway that has
been named the Hatch and Slack Pathway, is again a cyclic process. Let
us study the pathway by listing the steps.
    The primary CO2 acceptor is a 3-carbon molecule phosphoenol
pyruvate (PEP) and is present in the mesophyll cells. The enzyme
responsible for this fixation is PEP carboxylase or PEPcase. It is important
to register that the mesophyll cells lack RuBisCO enzyme. The C4 acid
OAA is formed in the mesophyll cells.
    It then forms other 4-carbon compounds like malic acid or aspartic
acid in the mesophyll cells itself, which are transported to the bundle
sheath cells. In the bundle sheath cells these C4 acids are broken down
to release CO2 and a 3-carbon molecule.
    The 3-carbon molecule is transported back to the mesophyll where it
is converted to PEP again, thus, completing the cycle.
    The CO2 released in the bundle sheath cells enters the C3 or the Calvin
pathway, a pathway common to all plants. The bundle sheath cells are




               Figure 13.9 Diagrammatic representation of the Hatch and Slack Pathway
220                                                                      BIOLOGY


      rich in an enzyme Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase
      (RuBisCO), but lack PEPcase. Thus, the basic pathway that results in
      the formation of the sugars, the Calvin pathway, is common to the C3 and
      C4 plants.
          Did you note that the Calvin pathway occurs in all the mesophyll
      cells of the C3 plants? In the C4 plants it does not take place in the
      mesophyll cells but does so only in the bundle sheath cells.

      13.9 PHOTORESPIRATION
      Let us try and understand one more process that creates an important
      difference between C3 and C4 plants – Photorespiration. To understand
      photorespiration we have to know a little bit more about the first step of
      the Calvin pathway – the first CO2 fixation step. This is the reaction
      where RuBP combines with CO2 to form 2 molecules of 3PGA, that is
      catalysed by RuBisCO.
                                    RuBisCo → 2 × 3PGA
                        RuBP + CO2 
          RuBisCO that is the most abundant enzyme in the world (Do you
      wonder why?) is characterised by the fact that its active site can bind to
      both CO2 and O2 – hence the name. Can you think how this could be
      possible? RuBisCO has a much greater affinity for CO2 than for O2. Imagine
      what would happen if this were not so! This binding is competitive. It is
      the relative concentration of O2 and CO2 that determines which of the two
      will bind to the enzyme.
          In C3 plants some O2 does bind to RuBisCO, and hence CO2 fixation is
      decreased. Here the RuBP instead of being converted to 2 molecules of
      PGA binds with O2 to form one molecule of phosphoglycerate and
      phosphoglycolate in a pathway called photorespiration. In the
      photorespiratory pathway, there is neither synthesis of sugars, nor of
      ATP. Rather it results in the release of CO2 with the utilisation of ATP. In
      the photorespiratory pathway there is no synthesis of ATP or NADPH.
      Therefore, photorespiration is a wasteful process.
          In C4 plants photorespiration does not occur. This is because they
      have a mechanism that increases the concentration of CO2 at the enzyme
      site. This takes place when the C4 acid from the mesophyll is broken
      down in the bundle sheath cells to release CO2 – this results in increasing
      the intracellular concentration of CO2. In turn, this ensures that the
      RuBisCO functions as a carboxylase minimising the oxygenase activity.
          Now that you know that the C4 plants lack photorespiration, you
      probably can understand why productivity and yields are better in these
      plants. In addition these plants show tolerance to higher temperatures.
          Based on the above discussion can you compare plants showing
      the C3 and the C4 pathway? Use the table format given and fill in the
      information.
   PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                         221


       TABLE 13.1 Fill in the Columns 2 and 3 in this table to highlight the differences
                      between C3 and C4 Plants

Characteristics                      C3 Plants   C4 Plants   Choose from
Cell type in which the Calvin                                Mesophyll/Bundle sheath/both
cycle takes place
Cell type in which the initial                               Mesophyll/Bundle sheath /both
carboxylation reaction occurs
How many cell types does the                                 Two: Bundle sheath and
leaf have that fix CO2.                                      mesophyll
                                                             One: Mesophyll
                                                             Three: Bundle sheath, palisade,
                                                             spongy mesophyll
Which is the primary CO2 acceptor                            RuBP/PEP/PGA
Number of carbons in the                                     5/4/3
primary CO2 acceptor
Which is the primary CO2                                     PGA/OAA/RuBP/PEP
fixation product
No. of carbons in the primary                                3/4/5
CO2 fixation product
Does the plant have RuBisCO?                                 Yes/No/Not always
Does the plant have PEP Case?                                Yes/No/Not always
Which cells in the plant have                                Mesophyll/Bundle sheath/none
Rubisco?
CO2 fixation rate under high                                 Low/ high/ medium
light conditions
Whether photorespiration is                                  High/negligible/sometimes
present at low light intensities
Whether photorespiration is                                  High/negligible/sometimes
present at high light intensities
Whether photorespiration would be                            High/negligible/sometimes
present at low CO2 concentrations
Whether photorespiration would be                            High/negligible/sometimes
present at high CO2 concentrations
Temperature optimum                                          30-40 C/20-25C/above 40 C
Examples                                                     Cut vertical sections of leaves of
                                                             different plants and observe under
                                                             the microscope for Kranz anatomy
                                                             and list them in the appropriate
                                                             columns.
                     222                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                        13.10 FACTORS AFFECTING PHOTOSYNTHESIS

                                        An understanding of the factors that affect photosynthesis is necessary.
                                        The rate of photosynthesis is very important in determining the yield of
                                        plants including crop plants. Photosynthesis is under the influence of
                                        several factors, both internal (plant) and external. The plant factors include
                                        the number, size, age and orientation of leaves, mesophyll cells and
                                        chloroplasts, internal CO2 concentration and the amount of chlorophyll.
                                        The plant or internal factors are dependent on the genetic predisposition
                                        and the growth of the plant.
                                             The external factors would include the availability of sunlight,
                                        temperature, CO2 concentration and water. As a plant photosynthesises,
                                        all these factors will simultaneously affect its rate. Hence, though several
                                        factors interact and simultaneously affect photosynthesis or CO2 fixation,
                                        usually one factor is the major cause or is the one that limits the rate.
                                        Hence, at any point the rate will be determined by the factor available at
                                        sub-optimal levels.
                                             When several factors affect any [bio] chemical process, Blackman’s
                                        (1905) Law of Limiting Factors comes into effect. This states the following:
                                             If a chemical process is affected by more than one factor, then its
                                        rate will be determined by the factor which is nearest to its minimal
                                        value: it is the factor which directly affects the process if its quantity is
                                        changed.
                                                                      For example, despite the presence of a green
                                                                  leaf and optimal light and CO2 conditions, the
                                                                  plant may not photosynthesise if the temperature
                                                                  is very low. This leaf, if given the optimal
                                                                  temperature, will start photosynthesising.
Rate of photosynthesis




                                                   C
                                                                 13.10.1 Light
                                    B
                         E                                       We need to distinguish between light quality, light
                                                                 intensity and the duration of exposure to light,
                             A                                   while discussing light as a factor that affects
                                                                 photosynthesis. There is a linear relationship
                                                                 between incident light and CO2 fixation rates at
                                                                 low light intensities. At higher light intensities,
                                                                 gradually the rate does not show further increase
                                         D                       as other factors become limiting (Figure 13.10).
                                 Light intensity                 What is interesting to note is that light saturation
                                                                 occurs at 10 per cent of the full sunlight. Hence,
Figure 13.10 Graph of light intensity on the                     except for plants in shade or in dense forests, light
             rate of photosynthesis                              is rarely a limiting factor in nature. Increase in
     PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                              223


incident light beyond a point causes the breakdown of chlorophyll and a
decrease in photosynthesis.

13.10.2 Carbon dioxide Concentration
Carbon dioxide is the major limiting factor for photosynthesis. The
concentration of CO2 is very low in the atmosphere (between 0.03 and
0.04 per cent). Increase in concentration upto 0.05 per cent can cause an
increase in CO2 fixation rates; beyond this the levels can become damaging
over longer periods.
    The C3 and C4 plants respond differently to CO2 concentrations. At
low light conditions neither group responds to high CO2 conditions. At
high light intensities, both C3 and C4 plants show increase in the rates of
photosynthesis. What is important to note is that the C4 plants show
saturation at about 360 µlL-1 while C3 responds to increased CO2
concentration and saturation is seen only beyond 450 µlL-1. Thus, current
availability of CO2 levels is limiting to the C3 plants.
    The fact that C3 plants respond to higher CO2 concentration by
showing increased rates of photosynthesis leading to higher productivity
has been used for some greenhouse crops such as tomatoes and bell
pepper. They are allowed to grow in carbon dioxide enriched atmosphere
that leads to higher yields.

13.10.3 Temperature
The dark reactions being enzymatic are temperature controlled. Though
the light reactions are also temperature sensitive they are affected to a
much lesser extent. The C4 plants respond to higher temperatures and
show higher rate of photosynthesis while C3 plants have a much lower
temperature optimum.
    The temperature optimum for photosynthesis of different plants also
depends on the habitat that they are adapted to. Tropical plants have a
higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate
climates.

13.10.4 Water
Even though water is one of the reactants in the light reaction, the effect of
water as a factor is more through its effect on the plant, rather than directly
on photosynthesis. Water stress causes the stomata to close hence reducing
the CO2 availability. Besides, water stress also makes leaves wilt, thus,
reducing the surface area of the leaves and their metabolic activity as well.
224                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                                              SUMMARY

      Green plants make their own food by photosynthesis. During this process carbon
      dioxide from the atmosphere is taken in by leaves through stomata and used for
      making carbohydrates, principally glucose and starch. Photosynthesis takes place
      only in the green parts of the plants, mainly the leaves. Within the leaves, the
      mesophyll cells have a large number of chloroplasts that are responsible for CO2
      fixation. Within the chloroplasts, the membranes are sites for the light reaction,
      while the chemosynthetic pathway occurs in the stroma. Photosynthesis has two
      stages: the light reaction and the carbon fixing reactions. In the light reaction the
      light energy is absorbed by the pigments present in the antenna, and funnelled to
      special chlorophyll a molecules called reaction centre chlorophylls. There are two
      photosystems, PS I and PS II. PS I has a 700 nm absorbing chlorophyll a P700
      molecule at its reaction centre, while PS II has a P680 reaction centre that absorbs
      red light at 680 nm. After absorbing light, electrons are excited and transferred
      through PS II and PS I and finally to NAD forming NADH. During this process a
      proton gradient is created across the membrane of the thylakoid. The breakdown
      of the protons gradient due to movement through the F0 part of the ATPase enzyme
      releases enough energy for synthesis of ATP. Splitting of water molecules is
      associated with PS II resulting in the release of O2, protons and transfer of electrons
      to PS II.
           In the carbon fixation cycle, CO2 is added by the enzyme, RuBisCO, to a 5-
      carbon compound RuBP that is converted to 2 molecules of 3-carbon PGA. This
      is then converted to sugar by the Calvin cycle, and the RuBP is regenerated. During
      this process ATP and NADPH synthesised in the light reaction are utilised. RuBisCO
      also catalyses a wasteful oxygenation reaction in C3 plants: photorespiration.
           Some tropical plants show a special type of photosynthesis called C4 pathway.
      In these plants the first product of CO2 fixation that takes place in the mesophyll,
      is a 4-carbon compound. In the bundle sheath cells the Calvin pathway is carried
      out for the synthesis of carbohydrates.



                                             EXERCISES

      1.   By looking at a plant externally can you tell whether a plant is C3 or C4? Why and
           how?
      2.   By looking at which internal structure of a plant can you tell whether a plant is
           C3 or C4? Explain.
      3.   Even though a very few cells in a C4 plant carry out the biosynthetic – Calvin
           pathway, yet they are highly productive. Can you discuss why?
PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS                                                             225


  4.   RuBisCO is an enzyme that acts both as a carboxylase and oxygenase. Why do
       you think RuBisCO carries out more carboxylation in C4 plants?
  5.   Suppose there were plants that had a high concentration of Chlorophyll b, but
       lacked chlorophyll a, would it carry out photosynthesis? Then why do plants
       have chlorophyll b and other accessory pigments?
  6.   Why is the colour of a leaf kept in the dark frequently yellow, or pale green?
       Which pigment do you think is more stable?
  7.   Look at leaves of the same plant on the shady side and compare it with the
       leaves on the sunny side. Or, compare the potted plants kept in the sunlight with
       those in the shade. Which of them has leaves that are darker green ? Why?
  8.   Figure 13.10 shows the effect of light on the rate of photosynthesis. Based on the
       graph, answer the following questions:
       (a) At which point/s (A, B or C) in the curve is light a limiting factor?
       (b) What could be the limiting factor/s in region A?
       (c) What do C and D represent on the curve?
  9.   Give comparison between the following:
       (a) C3 and C4 pathways
       (b) Cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
       (c) Anatomy of leaf in C3 and C4 plants
 278                                                                                        BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 18
                            BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
18.1 Blood              You have learnt that all living cells have to be provided with nutrients, O2
                        and other essential substances. Also, the waste or harmful substances
18.2 Lymph (Tissue
                        produced, have to be removed continuously for healthy functioning of
     Fluid)
                        tissues. It is therefore, essential to have efficient mechanisms for the
18.3 Circulatory        movement of these substances to the cells and from the cells. Different
     Pathways           groups of animals have evolved different methods for this transport. Simple
18.4 Double             organisms like sponges and coelenterates circulate water from their
     Circulation        surroundings through their body cavities to facilitate the cells to exchange
                        these substances. More complex organisms use special fluids within their
18.5 Regulation of      bodies to transport such materials. Blood is the most commonly used body
     Cardiac Activity   fluid by most of the higher organisms including humans for this purpose.
18.6 Disorders of       Another body fluid, lymph, also helps in the transport of certain substances.
     Circulatory        In this chapter, you will learn about the composition and properties of
     System             blood and lymph (tissue fluid) and the mechanism of circulation of blood
                        is also explained herein.


                        18.1 BLOOD

                        Blood is a special connective tissue consisting of a fluid matrix, plasma,
                        and formed elements.

                        18.1.1 Plasma
                        Plasma is a straw coloured, viscous fluid constituting nearly 55 per cent of
                        the blood. 90-92 per cent of plasma is water and proteins contribute 6-8
                        per cent of it. Fibrinogen, globulins and albumins are the major proteins.
    BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                                  279


Fibrinogens are needed for clotting or coagulation of blood. Globulins
primarly are involved in defense mechanisms of the body and the albumins
help in osmotic balance. Plasma also contains small amounts of minerals
like Na+, Ca++, Mg++, HCO3–, Cl–, etc. Glucose, amino acids, lipids, etc., are
also present in the plasma as they are always in transit in the body. Factors
for coagulation or clotting of blood are also present in the plasma in an
inactive form. Plasma without the clotting factors is called serum.

18.1.2 Formed Elements
Erythrocytes, leucocytes and platelets are collectively called formed
elements (Figure 18.1) and they constitute nearly 45 per cent of the blood.
    Erythrocytes or red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant of all
the cells in blood. A healthy adult man has, on an average, 5 millions to
5.5 millions of RBCs mm–3 of blood. RBCs are formed in the red bone
marrow in the adults. RBCs are devoid of nucleus in most of the mammals
and are biconcave in shape. They have a red coloured, iron containing
complex protein called haemoglobin, hence the colour and name of these
cells. A healthy individual has 12-16 gms of haemoglobin in every
100 ml of blood. These molecules play a significant role in transport of
respiratory gases. RBCs have an average life span of 120 days after which
they are destroyed in the spleen (graveyard of RBCs).
    Leucocytes are also known as white blood cells (WBC) as they are
colourless due to the lack of haemoglobin. They are nucleated and are
relatively lesser in number which averages 6000-8000 mm–3 of blood.
Leucocytes are generally short lived. We have two main categories of WBCs
– granulocytes and agranulocytes. Neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils
are different types of granulocytes, while lymphocytes and monocytes
are the agranulocytes. Neutrophils are the most abundant cells (60-65
per cent) of the total WBCs and basophils are the least (0.5-1 per cent)
among them. Neutrophils and monocytes (6-8 per cent) are phagocytic
cells which destroy foreign organisms entering the body. Basophils secrete
histamine, serotonin, heparin, etc., and are involved in inflammatory
reactions. Eosinophils (2-3 per cent) resist infections and are also



                               Eosinophil              Neutrophil              T lymphocyte
      RBC



                   Platelets                Basophil                Monocyte           B lymphocyte



              Figure 18.1 Diagrammatic representation of formed elements in blood
280                                                                      BIOLOGY


      associated with allergic reactions. Lymphocytes (20-25 per cent) are of
      two major types – ‘B’ and ‘T’ forms. Both B and T lymphocytes are
      responsible for immune responses of the body.
          Platelets also called thrombocytes, are cell fragments produced from
      megakaryocytes (special cells in the bone marrow). Blood normally
      contains 1,500,00-3,500,00 platelets mm–3. Platelets can release a variety
      of substances most of which are involved in the coagulation or clotting of
      blood. A reduction in their number can lead to clotting disorders which
      will lead to excessive loss of blood from the body.

      18.1.3 Blood Groups
      As you know, blood of human beings differ in certain aspects though it
      appears to be similar. Various types of grouping of blood has been done.
      Two such groupings – the ABO and Rh – are widely used all over the
      world.

      18.1.3.1 ABO grouping
      ABO grouping is based on the presence or absence of two surface antigens
      (chemicals that can induce immune response) on the RBCs namely A
      and B. Similarly, the plasma of different individuals contain two natural
      antibodies (proteins produced in response to antigens). The distribution
      of antigens and antibodies in the four groups of blood, A, B, AB and O
      are given in Table 18.1. You probably know that during blood transfusion,
      any blood cannot be used; the blood of a donor has to be carefully matched
      with the blood of a recipient before any blood transfusion to avoid severe
      problems of clumping (destruction of RBC). The donor’s compatibility is
      also shown in the Table 18.1.

               TABLE 18.1 Blood Groups and Donor Compatibility
         Blood Group        Antigens on      Antibodies Donor’s Group
                               RBCs          in Plasma

                A                 A             anti-B            A, O

                B                 B             anti-A            B, O

               AB               A, B              nil         AB, A, B, O

                O                nil           anti-A, B           O

         From the above mentioned table it is evident that group ‘O’ blood can
      be donated to persons with any other blood group and hence ‘O’ group
      individuals are called ‘universal donors’. Persons with ‘AB’ group can
      accept blood from persons with AB as well as the other groups of blood.
      Therefore, such persons are called ‘universal recipients’.
    BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                 281


18.1.3.2    Rh grouping
Another antigen, the Rh antigen similar to one present in Rhesus monkeys
(hence Rh), is also observed on the surface of RBCs of majority (nearly 80
per cent) of humans. Such individuals are called Rh positive (Rh+ve)
and those in whom this antigen is absent are called Rh negative (Rh-ve).
An Rh-ve person, if exposed to Rh+ve blood, will form specific antibodies
against the Rh antigens. Therefore, Rh group should also be matched
before transfusions. A special case of Rh incompatibility (mismatching)
has been observed between the Rh-ve blood of a pregnant mother with
Rh+ve blood of the foetus. Rh antigens of the foetus do not get exposed to
the Rh-ve blood of the mother in the first pregnancy as the two bloods are
well separated by the placenta. However, during the delivery of the first
child, there is a possibility of exposure of the maternal blood to small
amounts of the Rh+ve blood from the foetus. In such cases, the mother
starts preparing antibodies against Rh antigen in her blood. In case of
her subsequent pregnancies, the Rh antibodies from the mother (Rh-ve)
can leak into the blood of the foetus (Rh+ve) and destroy the foetal RBCs.
This could be fatal to the foetus or could cause severe anaemia and
jaundice to the baby. This condition is called erythroblastosis foetalis.
This can be avoided by administering anti-Rh antibodies to the mother
immediately after the delivery of the first child.

18.1.4 Coagulation of Blood
You know that when you cut your finger or hurt yourself, your wound
does not continue to bleed for a long time; usually the blood stops flowing
after sometime. Do you know why? Blood exhibits coagulation or clotting
in response to an injury or trauma. This is a mechanism to prevent
excessive loss of blood from the body. You would have observed a dark
reddish brown scum formed at the site of a cut or an injury over a period
of time. It is a clot or coagulam formed mainly of a network of threads
called fibrins in which dead and damaged formed elements of blood are
trapped. Fibrins are formed by the conversion of inactive fibrinogens in
the plasma by the enzyme thrombin. Thrombins, in turn are formed from
another inactive substance present in the plasma called prothrombin. An
enzyme complex, thrombokinase, is required for the above reaction. This
complex is formed by a series of linked enzymic reactions (cascade
process) involving a number of factors present in the plasma in an inactive
state. An injury or a trauma stimulates the platelets in the blood to release
certain factors which activate the mechanism of coagulation. Certain
factors released by the tissues at the site of injury also can initiate
coagulation. Calcium ions play a very important role in clotting.
282                                                                          BIOLOGY


      18.2 LYMPH (TISSUE FLUID)

      As the blood passes through the capillaries in tissues, some water along
      with many small water soluble substances move out into the spaces
      between the cells of tissues leaving the larger proteins and most of the
      formed elements in the blood vessels. This fluid released out is called the
      interstitial fluid or tissue fluid. It has the same mineral distribution as
      that in plasma. Exchange of nutrients, gases, etc., between the blood and
      the cells always occur through this fluid. An elaborate network of vessels
      called the lymphatic system collects this fluid and drains it back to the
      major veins. The fluid present in the lymphatic system is called the lymph.
      Lymph is a colourless fluid containing specialised lymphocytes which
      are responsible for the immune responses of the body. Lymph is also an
      important carrier for nutrients, hormones, etc. Fats are absorbed through
      lymph in the lacteals present in the intestinal villi.


      18.3 CIRCULATORY PATHWAYS

      The circulatory patterns are of two types – open or closed. Open
      circulatory system is present in arthropods and molluscs in which blood
      pumped by the heart passes through large vessels into open spaces or
      body cavities called sinuses. Annelids and chordates have a closed
      circulatory system in which the blood pumped by the heart is always
      circulated through a closed network of blood vessels. This pattern is
      considered to be more advantageous as the flow of fluid can be more
      precisely regulated.
          All vertebrates possess a muscular chambered heart. Fishes have a
      2-chambered heart with an atrium and a ventricle. Amphibians and the
      reptiles (except crocodiles) have a 3-chambered heart with two atria and a
      single ventricle, whereas crocodiles, birds and mammals possess a
      4-chambered heart with two atria and two ventricles. In fishes the heart
      pumps out deoxygenated blood which is oxygenated by the gills and
      supplied to the body parts from where deoxygenated blood is returned to
      the heart (single circulation). In amphibians and reptiles, the left atrium
      receives oxygenated blood from the gills/lungs/skin and the right atrium
      gets the deoxygenated blood from other body parts. However, they get mixed
      up in the single ventricle which pumps out mixed blood (incomplete double
      circulation). In birds and mammals, oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
      received by the left and right atria respectively passes on to the ventricles of
      the same sides. The ventricles pump it out without any mixing up, i.e., two
      separate circulatory pathways are present in these organisms, hence, these
      animals have double circulation. Let us study the human circulatory
      system.
     BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                    283


18.3.1 Human Circulatory System
Human circulatory system, also called the blood vascular system consists
of a muscular chambered heart, a network of closed branching blood
vessels and blood, the fluid which is circulated.
    Heart, the mesodermally derived organ, is situated in the thoracic
cavity, in between the two lungs, slightly tilted to the left. It has the size of
a clenched fist. It is protected by a double walled membranous bag,
pericardium, enclosing the pericardial fluid. Our heart has four
chambers, two relatively small upper chambers called atria and two larger
lower chambers called ventricles. A thin, muscular wall called the inter-
atrial septum separates the right and the left atria, whereas a thick-walled,
the inter-ventricular septum, separates the left and the right ventricles
(Figure 18.2). The atrium and the ventricle of the same side are also
separated by a thick fibrous tissue called the atrio-ventricular septum.
However, each of these septa are provided with an opening through which
the two chambers of the same side are connected. The opening between
the right atrium and the right ventricle is guarded by a valve formed of
three muscular flaps or cusps, the tricuspid valve, whereas a bicuspid
or mitral valve guards the opening between the left atrium and the left
ventricle. The openings of the right and the left ventricles into the




                                Figure 18.2 Section of a human heart
284                                                                          BIOLOGY


      pulmonary artery and the aorta respectively are provided with the
      semilunar valves. The valves in the heart allows the flow of blood only in
      one direction, i.e., from the atria to the ventricles and from the ventricles
      to the pulmonary artery or aorta. These valves prevent any backward
      flow.
          The entire heart is made of cardiac muscles. The walls of ventricles
      are much thicker than that of the atria. A specialised cardiac musculature
      called the nodal tissue is also distributed in the heart (Figure 18.2). A
      patch of this tissue is present in the right upper corner of the right atrium
      called the sino-atrial node (SAN). Another mass of this tissue is seen in
      the lower left corner of the right atrium close to the atrio-ventricular septum
      called the atrio-ventricular node (AVN). A bundle of nodal fibres, atrio-
      ventricular bundle (AV bundle) continues from the AVN which passes
      through the atrio-ventricular septa to emerge on the top of the inter-
      ventricular septum and immediately divides into a right and left bundle.
      These branches give rise to minute fibres throughout the ventricular
      musculature of the respective sides and are called purkinje fibres. These
      fibres alongwith right and left bundles are known as bundle of His. The
      nodal musculature has the ability to generate action potentials without
      any external stimuli, i.e., it is autoexcitable. However, the number of action
      potentials that could be generated in a minute vary at different parts of
      the nodal system. The SAN can generate the maximum number of action
      potentials, i.e., 70-75 min –1, and is responsible for initiating and
      maintaining the rhythmic contractile activity of the heart. Therefore, it is
      called the pacemaker. Our heart normally beats 70-75 times in a minute
      (average 72 beats min–1).

      18.3.2 Cardiac Cycle
      How does the heart function? Let us take a look. To begin with, all the
      four chambers of heart are in a relaxed state, i.e., they are in joint diastole.
      As the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are open, blood from the pulmonary
      veins and vena cava flows into the left and the right ventricle respectively
      through the left and right atria. The semilunar valves are closed at this
      stage. The SAN now generates an action potential which stimulates both
      the atria to undergo a simultaneous contraction – the atrial systole. This
      increases the flow of blood into the ventricles by about 30 per cent. The
      action potential is conducted to the ventricular side by the AVN and AV
      bundle from where the bundle of His transmits it through the entire
      ventricular musculature. This causes the ventricular muscles to contract,
      (ventricular systole), the atria undergoes relaxation (diastole), coinciding
      with the ventricular systole. Ventricular systole increases the ventricular
     BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                 285


pressure causing the closure of tricuspid and bicuspid valves due to
attempted backflow of blood into the atria. As the ventricular pressure
increases further, the semilunar valves guarding the pulmonary artery
(right side) and the aorta (left side) are forced open, allowing the blood in
the ventricles to flow through these vessels into the circulatory pathways.
The ventricles now relax (ventricular diastole) and the ventricular pressure
falls causing the closure of semilunar valves which prevents the backflow
of blood into the ventricles. As the ventricular pressure declines further,
the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are pushed open by the pressure in the
atria exerted by the blood which was being emptied into them by the
veins. The blood now once again moves freely to the ventricles. The
ventricles and atria are now again in a relaxed (joint diastole) state, as
earlier. Soon the SAN generates a new action potential and the events
described above are repeated in that sequence and the process continues.
     This sequential event in the heart which is cyclically repeated is called
the cardiac cycle and it consists of systole and diastole of both the atria
and ventricles. As mentioned earlier, the heart beats 72 times per minute,
i.e., that many cardiac cycles are performed per minute. From this it could
be deduced that the duration of a cardiac cycle is 0.8 seconds. During a
cardiac cycle, each ventricle pumps out approximately 70 mL of blood
which is called the stroke volume. The stroke volume multiplied by the
heart rate (no. of beats per min.) gives the cardiac output. Therefore, the
cardiac output can be defined as the volume of blood pumped out by each
ventricle per minute and averages 5000 mL or 5 litres in a healthy individual.
The body has the ability to alter the stroke volume as well as the heart rate
and thereby the cardiac output. For example, the cardiac output of an
athlete will be much higher than that of an ordinary man.
     During each cardiac cycle two prominent sounds are produced which
can be easily heard through a stethoscope. The first heart sound (lub) is
associated with the closure of the tricuspid and bicuspid valves whereas
the second heart sound (dub) is associated with the closure of the
semilunar valves. These sounds are of clinical diagnostic significance.

18.3.3 Electrocardiograph (ECG)
You are probably familiar with this scene from a typical hospital television
show: A patient is hooked up to a monitoring machine that shows voltage
traces on a screen and makes the sound “... pip... pip... pip.....
peeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee” as the patient goes into cardiac arrest. This type
of machine (electro-cardiograph) is used to obtain an electrocardiogram
(ECG). ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the
heart during a cardiac cycle. To obtain a standard ECG (as shown in the
 286                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                                                 Figure 18.3), a patient is connected to the
                                                 machine with three electrical leads (one to each
                                                 wrist and to the left ankle) that continuously
                                                 monitor the heart activity. For a detailed
                                                 evaluation of the heart’s function, multiple
                                                 leads are attached to the chest region. Here,
                                                 we will talk only about a standard ECG.
                                                     Each peak in the ECG is identified with a
Figure 18.3 Diagrammatic presentation of a       letter from P to T that corresponds to a specific
            standard ECG                         electrical activity of the heart.
                                                     The P-wave represents the electrical
                                                excitation (or depolarisation) of the atria,
                                                which leads to the contraction of both the atria.
                         The QRS complex represents the depolarisation of the ventricles,
                     which initiates the ventricular contraction. The contraction starts shortly
                     after Q and marks the beginning of the systole.
                         The T-wave represents the return of the ventricles from excited to
                     normal state (repolarisation). The end of the T -wave marks the end of
                     systole.
                         Obviously, by counting the number of QRS complexes that occur in a
                     given time period, one can determine the heart beat rate of an individual.
                     Since the ECGs obtained from different individuals have roughly the same
                     shape for a given lead configuration, any deviation from this shape
                     indicates a possible abnormality or disease. Hence, it is of a great clinical
                     significance.

                       18.4 DOUBLE CIRCULATION
                       As mentioned earlier, the blood pumped by the right ventricle enters the
                       pulmonary artery, whereas the left ventricle pumps blood into the aorta.
                       The deoxygenated blood pumped into the pulmonary artery is passed on
                       to the lungs from where the oxygenated blood is carried by the pulmonary
                       veins into the left atrium. This pathway constitutes the pulmonary
                       circulation. The oxygenated blood entering the aorta is carried by a
                       network of arteries, arterioles and capillaries to the tissues from where
                       the deoxygenated blood is collected by a system of venules, veins and
                       vena cava and emptied into the right atrium. This is the systemic
                       circulation (Figure 18.4). The systemic circulation provides nutrients, O2
                       and other essential substances to the tissues and takes CO2 and other
                       harmful substances away for elimination. A unique vascular connection
                       exists between the digestive tract and liver called hepatic portal system.
                       The hepatic portal vein carries blood from intestine to the liver before it is
                       delivered to the systemic circulation. A special coronary system of blood
                       vessels is present in our body exclusively for the circulation of blood to
                       and from the cardiac musculature.
     BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                   287




                     Figure 18.4 Schematic plan of blood circulation in human

18.5 REGULATION OF CARDIAC ACTIVITY
Normal activities of the heart are regulated intrinsically, i.e., auto regulated
by specialised muscles (nodal tissue), hence the heart is called myogenic.
A special neural centre in the medulla oblangata can moderate the cardiac
function through autonomic nervous system (ANS). Neural signals through
the sympathetic nerves (part of ANS) can increase the rate of heart beat,
the strength of ventricular contraction and thereby the cardiac output.
On the other hand, parasympathetic neural signals (another component
of ANS) decrease the rate of heart beat, speed of conduction of action
potential and thereby the cardiac output. Adrenal medullary hormones
can also increase the cardiac output.


18.6 DISORDERS OF CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Hypertension is the term for blood
pressure that is higher than normal (120/80). In this measurement 120
mm Hg (millimetres of mercury pressure) is the systolic, or pumping,
pressure and 80 mm Hg is the diastolic, or resting, pressure. If repeated
checks of blood pressure of an individual is 140/90 (140 over 90) or
higher, it shows hypertension. High blood pressure leads to heart diseases
and also affects vital organs like brain and kidney.
288                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Coronary Artery Disease, often referred
                      to as atherosclerosis, affects the vessels that supply blood to the heart
                      muscle. It is caused by deposits of calcium, fat, cholesterol and fibrous
                      tissues, which makes the lumen of arteries narrower.
                      Angina: It is also called ‘angina pectoris’. A symptom of acute chest pain
                      appears when no enough oxygen is reaching the heart muscle. Angina
                      can occur in men and women of any age but it is more common among
                      the middle-aged and elderly. It occurs due to conditions that affect the
                      blood flow.
                      Heart Failure: Heart failure means the state of heart when it is not pumping
                      blood effectively enough to meet the needs of the body. It is sometimes
                      called congestive heart failure because congestion of the lungs is one of
                      the main symptoms of this disease. Heart failure is not the same as cardiac
                      arrest (when the heart stops beating) or a heart attack (when the heart
                      muscle is suddenly damaged by an inadequate blood supply).



                                           SUMMARY

      Vertebrates circulate blood, a fluid connective tissue, in their body, to transport
      essential substances to the cells and to carry waste substances from there. Another
      fluid, lymph (tissue fluid) is also used for the transport of certain substances.
          Blood comprises of a fluid matrix, plasma and formed elements. Red blood
      cells (RBCs, erythrocytes), white blood cells (WBCs, leucocytes) and platelets
      (thrombocytes) constitute the formed elements. Blood of humans are grouped into
      A, B, AB and O systems based on the presence or absence of two surface antigens,
      A, B on the RBCs. Another blood grouping is also done based on the presence or
      absence of another antigen called Rhesus factor (Rh) on the surface of RBCs. The
      spaces between cells in the tissues contain a fluid derived from blood called tissue
      fluid. This fluid called lymph is almost similar to blood except for the protein
      content and the formed elements.
          All vertebrates and a few invertebrates have a closed circulatory system. Our
      circulatory system consists of a muscular pumping organ, heart, a network of
      vessels and a fluid, blood. Heart has two atria and two ventricles. Cardiac
      musculature is auto-excitable. Sino-atrial node (SAN) generates the maximum
      number of action protentials per minute (70-75/min) and therefore, it sets the
      pace of the activities of the heart. Hence it is called the Pacemaker. The action
      potential causes the atria and then the ventricles to undergo contraction (systole)
      followed by their relaxation (diastole). The systole forces the blood to move from
      the atria to the ventricles and to the pulmonary artery and the aorta. The cardiac
      cycle is formed by sequential events in the heart which is cyclically repeated and is
      called the cardiac cycle. A healthy person shows 72 such cycles per minute. About
      70 mL of blood is pumped out by each ventricle during a cardiac cycle and it is
      called the stroke or beat volume. Volume of blood pumped out by each ventricle of
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION                                                               289


  heart per minute is called the cardiac output and it is equal to the product of
  stroke volume and heart rate (approx 5 litres). The electrical activity of the heart
  can be recorded from the body surface by using electrocardiograph and the
  recording is called electrocardiogram (ECG) which is of clinical importance.
      We have a complete double circulation, i.e., two circulatory pathways, namely,
  pulmonary and systemic are present. The pulmonary circulation starts by the
  pumping of deoxygenated blood by the right ventricle which is carried to the lungs
  where it is oxygenated and returned to the left atrium. The systemic circulation
  starts with the pumping of oxygenated blood by the left ventricle to the aorta
  which is carried to all the body tissues and the deoxygenated blood from there is
  collected by the veins and returned to the right atrium. Though the heart is
  autoexcitable, its functions can be moderated by neural and hormonal mechanisms.



                                          EXERCISES

   1.   Name the components of the formed elements in the blood and mention one
        major function of each of them.
   2.   What is the importance of plasma proteins?
   3.   Match Column I with Column II :
        Column I              Column II
        (a) Eosinophils         (i)   Coagulation
        (b) RBC                (ii)   Universal Recipient
        (c) AB Group          (iii)   Resist Infections
        (d) Platelets         (iv)    Contraction of Heart
        (e) Systole            (v)    Gas transport
   4.   Why do we consider blood as a connective tissue?
   5.   What is the difference between lymph and blood?
   6.   What is meant by double circulation? What is its significance?
   7.   Write the differences between :
        (a) Blood and Lymph
        (b) Open and Closed system of circulation
        (c) Systole and Diastole
        (d) P-wave and T-wave
   8.   Describe the evolutionary change in the pattern of heart among the vertebrates.
   9. Why do we call our heart myogenic?
  10. Sino-atrial node is called the pacemaker of our heart. Why?
  11. What is the significance of atrio-ventricular node and atrio-ventricular bundle
      in the functioning of heart?
  12. Define a cardiac cycle and the cardiac output.
  13. Explain heart sounds.
  14. Draw a standard ECG and explain the different segments in it.
  46                                                                                           BIOLOGY




                             CHAPTER 4
                             ANIMAL KINGDOM
4.1 Basis of            When you look around, you will observe different animals with different
    Classification      structures and forms. As over a million species of animals have been
                        described till now, the need for classification becomes all the more
4.2 Classification of
                        important. The classification also helps in assigning a systematic position
    Animals             to newly described species.


                        4.1 BASIS      OF   CLASSIFICATION
                        Inspite of differences in structure and form of different animals, there are
                        fundamental features common to various individuals in relation to the
                        arrangement of cells, body symmetry, nature of coelom, patterns of
                        digestive, circulatory or reproductive systems. These features are used
                        as the basis of animal classification and some of them are discussed here.

                        4.1.1    Levels of Organisation
                        Though all members of Animalia are multicellular, all of them do not
                        exhibit the same pattern of organisation of cells. For example, in sponges,
                        the cells are arranged as loose cell aggregates, i.e., they exhibit cellular
                        level of organisation. Some division of labour (activities) occur among
                        the cells. In coelenterates, the arrangement of cells is more complex. Here
                        the cells performing the same function are arranged into tissues, hence is
                        called tissue level of organisation. A still higher level of organisation, i.e.,
                        organ level is exhibited by members of Platyhelminthes and other higher
                        phyla where tissues are grouped together to form organs, each specialised
                        for a particular function. In animals like Annelids, Arthropods, Molluscs,
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                                 74
                                                                                                  47


Echinoderms and Chordates, organs have
associated to form functional systems, each
system concerned with a specific physiological
function. This pattern is called organ system
level of organisation. Organ systems in different
groups of animals exhibit various patterns of
complexities. For example, the digestive system
in Platyhelminthes has only a single opening
to the outside of the body that serves as both
mouth and anus, and is hence called
incomplete. A complete digestive system has
two openings, mouth and anus. Similarly, the
                                                          Figure 4.1 (a) Radial symmetry
circulatory system may be of two types:
(i) open type in which the blood is pumped
out of the heart and the cells and tissues are
directly bathed in it and
(ii) closed type in which the blood is circulated
through a series of vessels of varying diameters
(arteries, veins and capillaries).

4.1.2 Symmetry
Animals can be categorised on the basis of their
symmetry. Sponges are mostly asymmetrical,
i.e., any plane that passes through the centre
does not divide them into equal halves. When
any plane passing through the central axis of
the body divides the organism into two identical
halves, it is called radial symmetry.                     Figure 4.1 (b) Bilateral symmetry
Coelenterates, ctenophores and echinoderms
have this kind of body plan (Figure 4.1a).
Animals like annelids, arthropods, etc., where                          Ectoderm
                                                      Mesoglea
the body can be divided into identical left and                         Endoderm
right halves in only one plane, exhibit bilateral
symmetry (Figure 4.1b).

4.1.3 Diploblastic and Triploblastic
      Organisation
Animals in which the cells are arranged in two
embryonic layers, an external ectoderm and
                                                                           Mesoderm
an internal endoderm, are called diploblastic                    (a)                        (b)
animals, e.g., coelenterates. An undifferentiated
layer, mesoglea, is present in between the          Figure 4.2     Showing germinal layers :
ectoderm and the endoderm (Figure 4.2a).                           (a) Diploblastic (b) Triploblastic
 48                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                      Those animals in which the developing embryo has a third germinal layer,
                      mesoderm, in between the ectoderm and endoderm, are called
                      triploblastic animals (platyhelminthes to chordates, Figure 4.2b).


                                               4.1.4    Coelom
                                               Presence or absence of a cavity between the body
                                               wall and the gut wall is very important in
                                               classification. The body cavity, which is lined
                                               by mesoderm is called coelom. Animals
                                               possessing coelom are called coelomates, e.g.,
                                               annelids, molluscs, arthropods, echinoderms,
                                               hemichordates and chordates (Figure 4.3a). In
                                               some animals, the body cavity is not lined by
                                               mesoderm, instead, the mesoderm is present as
                                               scattered pouches in between the ectoderm and
                                               endoderm. Such a body cavity is called
                                               pseudocoelom and the animals possessing them
                                               are called pseudocoelomates, e.g.,
                                               aschelminthes (Figure 4.3b). The animals in
Figure 4.3 Diagrammatic sectional view of :    which the body cavity is absent are called
           (a) Coelomate (b) Pseudocoelomate   acoelomates, e.g., platyhelminthes (Figure 4.3c).
           (c) Acoelomate

                      4.1.5 Segmentation
                      In some animals, the body is externally and internally divided into
                      segments with a serial repetition of at least some organs. For example, in
                      earthworm, the body shows this pattern called metameric segmentation
                      and the phenomenon is known as metamerism.

                      4.1.6 Notochord
                      Notochord is a mesodermally derived rod-like structure formed on the
                      dorsal side during embryonic development in some animals. Animals with
                      notochord are called chordates and those animals which do not form this
                      structure are called non-chordates, e.g., porifera to echinoderms.


                      4.2 CLASSIFICATION       OF   ANIMALS

                      The broad classification of Animalia based on common fundamental
                      features as mentioned in the preceding sections is given in Figure 4.4.
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                                     94
                                                                                                      49



      Kingdom           Levels of                           Body Cavity
                                         Symmetry                                      Phylum
                      Organisation                           or Coelom
                      Cellular level                                                  Porifera

                                                                                      Coelenterata
                                                                                       (Cnidaria)
      Animalia                         Radial
    (multicellular)                                                                   Ctenophora

                      Tissue/Organ/                      Without body cavity          Platyhelminthes
                      Organ system                          (acoelomates)

                                                           With false coelom          Aschelminthes
                                       Bilateral          (pseudocoelomates)
                                                                                      Annelida
                                                                                      Arthropoda
                                                          With true coelom            Mollusca
                                                            (coelomates)              *Echinodermata
                                                                                      Hemichordata
                                                                                      Chordata

 *Echinodermata exhibits radial or bilateral symmetry depending on the stage.
 Figure 4.4    Broad classification of Kingdom Animalia based on common fundamental features
    The important characteristic features of the
different phyla are described.

4.2.1 Phylum – Porifera
Members of this phylum are commonly known
as sponges. They are generally marine and mostly
asymmetrical animals (Figure 4.5). These are
primitive multicellular animals and have cellular
level of organisation. Sponges have a water
transport or canal system. Water enters through
minute pores (ostia) in the body wall into a central
cavity, spongocoel, from where it goes out
through the osculum. This pathway of water
transport is helpful in food gathering, respiratory                                          (b)
exchange and removal of waste. Choanocytes
                                                     (a)
or collar cells line the spongocoel and the canals.
Digestion is intracellular. The body is supported
by a skeleton made up of spicules or spongin
fibres. Sexes are not separate (hermaphrodite),
i.e., eggs and sperms are produced by the same
individual. Sponges reproduce asexually by
fragmentation and sexually by formation of
gametes. Fertilisation is internal and development                              (c)
is indirect having a larval stage which is Figure 4.5               Examples of Porifera : (a) Sycon
morphologically distinct from the adult.                            (b) Euspongia (c) Spongilla
 50                                                                                          BIOLOGY


                        Examples: Sycon (Scypha), Spongilla (Fresh water sponge) and Euspongia
                        (Bath sponge).

                        4.2.2 Phylum – Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
                        They are aquatic, mostly marine, sessile or free-swimming, radially
                        symmetrical animals (Figure 4.6). The name cnidaria is derived from the




                        (a)                                         (b)
       Figure 4.6      Examples of Coelenterata indicating outline of their body form :
                       (a) Aurelia (Medusa) (b) Adamsia (Polyp)

                        cnidoblasts or cnidocytes (which contain the stinging capsules or
                        nematocytes) present on the tentacles and the body. Cnidoblasts are used
                        for anchorage, defense and for the capture of prey (Figure 4.7). Cnidarians
                        exhibit tissue level of organisation and are diploblastic. They have a central
                        gastro-vascular cavity with a single opening, mouth on hypostome.
                        Digestion is extracellular and intracellular. Some of the cnidarians, e.g.,
                        corals have a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate. Cnidarians exhibit
                        two basic body forms called polyp and medusa (Figure 4.6). The former
                        is a sessile and cylindrical form like Hydra, Adamsia, etc. whereas, the
Figure 4.7              latter is umbrella-shaped and free-swimming like Aurelia or jelly fish.
Diagrammatic view of    Those cnidarians which exist in both forms exhibit alternation of
Cnidoblast              generation (Metagenesis), i.e., polyps produce medusae asexually and
                        medusae form the polyps sexually (e.g., Obelia).
                        Examples: Physalia (Portuguese man-of-war), Adamsia (Sea anemone),
                        Pennatula (Sea-pen), Gorgonia (Sea-fan) and Meandrina (Brain coral).
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                           15
                                                                                            51


4.2.3     Phylum – Ctenophora
Ctenophores, commonly known as sea walnuts or comb jellies
are exclusively marine, radially symmetrical, diploblastic
organisms with tissue level of organisation. The body bears
eight external rows of ciliated comb plates, which help in
locomotion (Figure 4.8). Digestion is both extracellular and
intracellular. Bioluminescence (the property of a living
organism to emit light) is well-marked in ctenophores. Sexes
are not separate. Reproduction takes place only by sexual
means. Fertilisation is external with indirect development.
Examples: Pleurobrachia and Ctenoplana.


4.2.4     Phylum – Platyhelminthes
They have dorso-ventrally flattened body, hence are called
flatworms (Figure 4.9). These are mostly endoparasites found
in animals including human beings. Flatworms are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and acoelomate animals with organ
level of organisation. Hooks and suckers are present in the          Figure 4.8 Example of
parasitic forms. Some of them absorb nutrients from the host                    Ctenophora
                                                                                (Pleurobrachia)
directly through their body surface. Specialised cells called
flame cells help in osmoregulation and excretion. Sexes are not
separate. Fertilisation is internal and development is through
many larval stages. Some members like Planaria possess high
regeneration capacity.
Examples: Taenia (Tapeworm), Fasciola (Liver fluke).




                   (a)                                  (b)
        Figure 4.9 Examples of Platyhelminthes : (a) Tape worm (b) Liver fluke
 52                                                                                          BIOLOGY


                                                4.2.5     Phylum – Aschelminthes
                                                The body of the aschelminthes is circular in
                                                cross-section, hence, the name roundworms
                                                (Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic
                                                and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
                                                Roundworms have organ-system level of body
                                                organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical,
                                                triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
                                                Alimentary canal is complete with a well-
                                                developed muscular pharynx. An excretory
                                                tube removes body wastes from the body cavity
                                                through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate
                                                (dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
                                                Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation
                                                is internal and development may be direct (the
         Male          Female
                                                young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.
        Figure 4.10 Aschelminthes
                                                Examples : Ascaris (Round Worm), Wuchereria
                    – Roundworm
                                                (Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).

                                                4.2.6     Phylum – Annelida
                                                They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or
                                                terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
                                                They exhibit organ-system level of body
                                                organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are
                                                triploblastic, metamerically segmented and
                                                coelomate animals. Their body surface is
                                                distinctly marked out into segments or
                                                metameres and, hence, the phylum name
                                                Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
                                                They possess longitudinal and circular muscles
                                                which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
                                                Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia,
                                                which help in swimming. A closed circulatory
                                                system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
                                                help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural
                                                system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
                                                connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral
                                                nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious,
                                                but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
                                                Reproduction is sexual.

Figure 4.11 Examples of Annelida : (a) Nereis   Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
            (b) Hirudinaria                     Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                       35
                                                                                        53


4.2.7    Phylum – Arthropoda
This is the largest phylum of Animalia which
includes insects. Over two-thirds of all named
species on earth are arthropods (Figure 4.12).
They have organ-system level of organisation.
They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic,
segmented and coelomate animals. The body
of arthropods is covered by chitinous                     (a)                    (b)
exoskeleton. The body consists of head, thorax
and abdomen. They have jointed appendages
(arthros-joint, poda-appendages). Respiratory
organs are gills, book gills, book lungs or
tracheal system. Circulatory system is of open
type. Sensory organs like antennae, eyes
(compound and simple), statocysts or balance
organs are present. Excretion takes place
through malpighian tubules. They are mostly
dioecious. Fertilisation is usually internal.
They are mostly oviparous. Development may                 (c)                   (d)
be direct or indirect.
Examples: Economically important insects –         Figure 4.12 Examples of Arthropoda :
Apis (Honey bee), Bombyx (Silkworm), Laccifer                  (a) Locust (b) Butterfly
(Lac insect)                                                   (c) Scorpion (d) Prawn
Vectors – Anopheles, Culex and Aedes
(Mosquitoes)
Gregarious pest – Locusta (Locust)
Living fossil – Limulus (King crab).

4.2.8    Phylum – Mollusca
This is the second largest animal phylum
(Figure 4.13). Molluscs are terrestrial or
aquatic (marine or fresh water) having an
organ-system level of organisation. They are
bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and
coelomate animals. Body is covered by a                  (a)
calcareous shell and is unsegmented with a
distinct head, muscular foot and visceral
hump. A soft and spongy layer of skin forms a
mantle over the visceral hump. The space
between the hump and the mantle is called the
mantle cavity in which feather like gills are
present. They have respiratory and excretory
functions. The anterior head region has sensory                                 (b)
tentacles. The mouth contains a file-like          Figure 4.13 Examples of Mollusca :
rasping organ for feeding, called radula.                      (a) Pila (b) Octopus
54                                                                                    BIOLOGY


                              They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect
                              development.
                              Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia
                              (Cuttlefish), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil fish), Aplysia (Sea-
                              hare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).

                              4.2.9 Phylum – Echinodermata
     (a)
                              These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles
                              and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
                              4.14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
                              The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae
                              are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and
                              coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth
                              on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
           (b)                side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the
                              presence of water vascular system which helps in
Figure 4.14 Examples of       locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
            Echinodermata :   An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
            (a) Asterias      Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
            (b) Ophiura       Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.
                              Examples: Asterias (Star fish), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon
                              (Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle
                              star).

                              4.2.10 Phylum – Hemichordata
                              Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under
                              phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum
                              under non-chordata.
                                 This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like
                              marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They
                              are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
                              animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an
                              anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4.15).
                              Circulatory system is of open type. Respiration takes place
                              through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are
                              separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.
                              Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.

                              4.2.11 Phylum – Chordata
                              Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally
  Figure 4.15 Balanoglossus   characterised by the presence of a notochord, a dorsal
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                            55
                                                                                             55


hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal               Nerve cord     Notochord
gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic, coelomate with
organ-system level of organisation. They
possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
system.                                                                             Post-anal part
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient
                                                                   Gill slits
features of chordates and non-chordates.
                                                      Figure 4.16     Chordata characteristics

                    TABLE 4.1 Comparison of Chordates and Non-chordates
   S.No. Chordates                                  Non-chordates
   1.      Notochord present.                       Notochord absent.
   2.      Central nervous system is dorsal,        Central nervous system is ventral, solid
           hollow and single.                       and double.
   3.      Pharynx perforated by gill slits.        Gill slits are absent.
   4.      Heart is ventral.                        Heart is dorsal (if present).
   5.      A post-anal part (tail) is present.      Post-anal tail is absent.


Phylum Chordata is divided into three
subphyla: Urochordata or Tunicata,
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata.
    Subphyla          Urochordata          and
Cephalochordata are often referred to as
protochordates (Figure 4.17) and are
exclusively marine. In Urochordata, notochord
is present only in larval tail, while in
Cephalochordata, it extends from head to tail
region and is persistent throughout their life.
Examples: Urochordata – Ascidia, Salpa,
Doliolum; Cephalochordata – Branchiostoma
(Amphioxus or Lancelet).
    The members of subphylum Vertebrata
possess notochord during the embryonic
period. The notochord is replaced by a
cartilaginous or bony vertebral column in the
adult. Thus all vertebrates are chordates but
all chordates are not vertebrates. Besides the                 Figure 4.17 Ascidia
basic chordate characters, vertebrates have a
ventral muscular heart with two, three or four
chambers, kidneys for excretion and
osmoregulation and paired appendages which
may be fins or limbs.
 56                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                      The subphylum Vertebrata is further divided as follows:

                                    Vertebrata
                                      Division

                       Agnatha                         Gnathostomata
                     (lacks jaw)                         (bears jaw)
                                                        Super Class

                                           Pisces                       Tetrapoda
                                         (bear fins)                   (bear limbs)

                       Class               Class                            Class
                  1. Cyclostomata       1. Chondrichthyes              1.   Amphibia
                                        2. Osteichthyes                2.   Reptilia
                                                                       3.   Aves
                                                                       4.   Mammals


                                                 4.2.11.1    Class – Cyclostomata
                                                 All living members of the class Cyclostomata are
                                                 ectoparasites on some fishes. They have an
                                                 elongated body bearing 6-15 pairs of gill slits
                                                 for respiration. Cyclostomes have a sucking and
                                                 circular mouth without jaws (Fig. 4.18). Their
                                                 body is devoid of scales and paired fins.
                                                 Cranium and vertebral column are
                                                 cartilaginous. Circulation is of closed type.
Figure 4.18 A jawless vertebrate - Petromyzon    Cyclostomes are marine but migrate for
                                                 spawning to fresh water. After spawning, within
                                                 a few days, they die. Their larvae, after
                                                 metamorphosis, return to the ocean.
                                                 Examples: Petromyzon (Lamprey) and Myxine
                                                 (Hagfish).
                                                 4.2.11.2    Class – Chondrichthyes
                                                 They are marine animals with streamlined body
                      (a)
                                                 and have cartilaginous endoskeleton
                                                 (Figure 4.19). Mouth is located ventrally.
                                                 Notochord is persistent throughout life. Gill
                                                 slits are separate and without operculum (gill
                                                 cover). The skin is tough, containing minute
                                                 placoid scales. Teeth are modified placoid
                        (b)                      scales which are backwardly directed. Their
                                                 jaws are very powerful. These animals are
Figure 4.19 Example of Cartilaginous fishes :    predaceous. Due to the absence of air bladder,
            (a) Scoliodon (b) Pristis            they have to swim constantly to avoid sinking.
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                           75
                                                                                            57


Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e.g., Torpedo) and
some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are
cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack
the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes
are separate. In males pelvic fins bear claspers. They
have internal fertilisation and many of them are
viviparous.
Examples: Scoliodon (Dog fish), Pristis (Saw fish),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).
4.2.11.3   Class – Osteichthyes
It includes both marine and fresh water fishes with bony
endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is
mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of
gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid/ctenoid scales. Air bladder
is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is two-
                                                                   (a)                (b)
chambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation    Figure 4.20 Examples of Bony fishes :
is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and                     (a) Hippocampus (b) Catla
development is direct.
Examples: Marine – Exocoetus (Flying fish),
Hippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater – Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium – Betta
(Fighting fish), Pterophyllum (Angel fish).

4.2.11.4   Class – Amphibia
As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life),
amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial
                                                                             (a)
habitats (Figure 4.21). Most of them have two pairs of
limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may
be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist
(without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum
represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and
reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called
cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by
gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is three-
chambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
                                                                           (b)
is external. They are oviparous and development
is indirect.
                                                            Figure 4.21 Examples of Amphibia :
Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
                                                                        (a) Salamandra
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless                          (b) Rana
amphibia).
58                                                                                       BIOLOGY




     (a)                            (b)                          (c)                   (d)

           Figure 4.22 Reptiles: (a) Chameleon (b) Crocodilus (c) Chelone (d) Naja


                    4.2.11.5    Class – Reptilia
                    The class name refers to their creeping or crawling mode of locomotion
                    (Latin, repere or reptum, to creep or crawl). They are mostly terrestrial
                    animals and their body is covered by dry and cornified skin, epidermal
                    scales or scutes (Fig. 4.22). They do not have external ear openings.
                    Tympanum represents ear. Limbs, when present, are two pairs. Heart is
                    usually three-chambered, but four-chambered in crocodiles. Reptiles are
                    poikilotherms. Snakes and lizards shed their scales as skin cast. Sexes
                    are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development
                    is direct.
                    Examples: Chelone (Turtle), Testudo (Tortoise), Chameleon (Tree lizard),
                    Calotes (Garden lizard), Crocodilus (Crocodile), Alligator (Alligator).
                    Hemidactylus (Wall lizard), Poisonous snakes – Naja (Cobra), Bangarus
                    (Krait), Vipera (Viper).
                    4.2.11.6    Class – Aves
                    The characteristic features of Aves (birds) are the presence of feathers
                    and most of them can fly except flightless birds (e.g., Ostrich). They possess
                    beak (Figure 4.23). The forelimbs are modified into wings. The hind limbs
                    generally have scales and are modified for walking, swimming or clasping
                    the tree branches. Skin is dry without glands except the oil gland at the
                    base of the tail. Endoskeleton is fully ossified (bony) and the long bones
                    are hollow with air cavities (pneumatic). The digestive tract of birds has
                    additional chambers, the crop and gizzard. Heart is completely four-
                    chambered. They are warm-blooded (homoiothermous) animals, i.e.,
                    they are able to maintain a constant body temperature. Respiration is by
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                              95
                                                                                               59




      (a)                      (b)                     (c)                               (d)


            Figure 4.23 Some birds : (a) Neophron (b) Struthio (c) Psittacula (d) Pavo


lungs. Air sacs connected to lungs supplement respiration. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is
direct.
Examples : Corvus (Crow), Columba (Pigeon), Psittacula (Parrot), Struthio
(Ostrich), Pavo (Peacock), Aptenodytes (Penguin), Neophron (Vulture).

4.2.11.7    Class – Mammalia
They are found in a variety of habitats – polar ice caps, deserts, mountains,
forests, grasslands and dark caves. Some of them have adapted to fly or
live in water. The most unique mammalian characteristic is the presence
of milk producing glands (mammary glands) by which the young ones
are nourished. They have two pairs of limbs, adapted for walking, running,
climbing, burrowing, swimming or flying (Figure 4.24). The skin of




                                                                       (c)

                (a)




                                                                      (d)
                                         (b)
   Figure 4.24 Some mammals : (a) Ornithorhynchus (b) Macropus (c) Pteropus (d) Balaenoptera
 60                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                         mammals is unique in possessing hair. External ears or pinnae are
                         present. Different types of teeth are present in the jaw. Heart is four-
                         chambered. They are homoiothermous. Respiration is by lungs. Sexes
                         are separate and fertilisation is internal. They are viviparous with few
                         exceptions and development is direct.
                         Examples: Oviparous-Ornithorhynchus (Platypus); Viviparous -
                         Macropus (Kangaroo), Pteropus (Flying fox), Camelus (Camel), Macaca
                         (Monkey), Rattus (Rat), Canis (Dog), Felis (Cat), Elephas (Elephant),
                         Equus (Horse), Delphinus (Common dolphin), Balaenoptera (Blue whale),
                         Panthera tigris (Tiger), Panthera leo (Lion).
                             The salient distinguishing features of all phyla under animal kingdom
                         is comprehensively given in the Table 4.2.

             TABLE 4.2 Salient Features of Different Phyla in the Animal Kingdom

Phylum       Level of   Symme-    Coelom   Segmen- Digestive      Circu-    Respi-    Distinctive
             Organi-    try                tation  System         latory    ratory    Features
             sation                                               System    System


             Cellular             Absent                          Absent    Absent    Body with pores
Porifera                Various            Absent    Absent
                                                                                      and canals in walls.
Coelenterata                                                                          Cnidoblasts
(Cnidaria) Tissue       Radial    Absent   Absent    Incomplete   Absent    Absent
                                                                                      present.

             Tissue     Radial    Absent   Absent    Incomplete   Absent    Absent    Comb plates for
Ctenophora
                                                                                      locomotion.
             Organ &
Platyhelm-   Organ-     Bilateral Absent   Absent    Incomplete   Absent    Absent    Flat body, suckers.
inthes       system
           Organ-                 Pseudo                                              Often worm-
Aschelmin-              Bilateral coelo-   Absent    Complete     Absent    Absent    shaped,
           system
thes                              mate                                                elongated.
             Organ-               Coelo-                                              Body segment-
Annelida     system     Bilateral mate     Present   Complete     Present   Absent    ation like rings.
           Organ-                                                                     Exoskeleton of cu-
                        Bilateral Coelo-   Present   Complete     Present   Present
                                                                                      ticle, jointed ap-
Arthropoda system                 mate
                                                                                      pendages.
             Organ-     Bilateral Coelo-   Absent    Complete     Present   Present   External skeleton
Mollusca     system               mate                                                of shell usually
                                                                                      present.

             Organ-               Coelo-                                              Water vascular
Echino-                 Radial             Absent    Complete     Present   Present
             system               mate                                                system, radial
dermata
                                                                                      symmetry.
             Organ-     Bilateral Coelo-                                              Wor m-like with
Hemi-                                      Absent    Complete     Present   Present
             system               mate                                                proboscis, collar
chordata
                                                                                      and trunk.
                                                                                      Notochord, dorsal
Chordata     Organ-     Bilateral Coelo-   Present   Complete     Present   Present   hollow nerve cord,
             system               mate                                                gill slits with
                                                                                      limbs or fins.
ANIMAL KINGDOM
    ANIMAL KINGDOM                                                                               16
                                                                                                61


                                           SUMMARY

      The basic fundamental features such as level of organisation, symmetry, cell
      organisation, coelom, segmentation, notochord, etc., have enabled us to broadly
      classify the animal kingdom. Besides the fundamental features, there are many
      other distinctive characters which are specific for each phyla or class.
           Porifera includes multicellular animals which exhibit cellular level of
      organisation and have characteristic flagellated choanocytes. The coelenterates
      have tentacles and bear cnidoblasts. They are mostly aquatic, sessile or free-floating.
      The ctenophores are marine animals with comb plates. The platyhelminths have
      flat body and exhibit bilateral symmetry. The parasitic forms show distinct suckers
      and hooks. Aschelminthes are pseudocoelomates and include parasitic as well as
      non-parasitic round worms.
           Annelids are metamerically segmented animals with a true coelom. The
      arthropods are the most abundant group of animals characterised by the presence
      of jointed appendages. The molluscs have a soft body surrounded by an external
      calcareous shell. The body is covered with external skeleton made of chitin. The
      echinoderms possess a spiny skin. Their most distinctive feature is the presence
      of water vascular system. The hemichordates are a small group of worm-like marine
      animals. They have a cylindrical body with proboscis, collar and trunk.
           Phylum Chordata includes animals which possess a notochord either
      throughout or during early embryonic life. Other common features observed in
      the chordates are the dorsal, hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits.
      Some of the vertebrates do not possess jaws (Agnatha) whereas most of them possess
      jaws (Gnathostomata). Agnatha is represented by the class, Cyclostomata. They
      are the most primitive chordates and are ectoparasites on fishes. Gnathostomata
      has two super classes, Pisces and Tetrapoda. Classes Chondrichthyes and
      Osteichthyes bear fins for locomotion and are grouped under Pisces. The
      Chondrichthyes are fishes with cartilaginous endoskeleton and are marine. Classes,
      Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia have two pairs of limbs and are thus
      grouped under Tetrapoda. The amphibians have adapted to live both on land and
      water. Reptiles are characterised by the presence of dry and cornified skin. Limbs
      are absent in snakes. Fishes, amphibians and reptiles are poikilothermous (cold-
      blooded). Aves are warm-blooded animals with feathers on their bodies and
      forelimbs modified into wings for flying. Hind limbs are adapted for walking,
      swimming, perching or clasping. The unique features of mammals are the presence
      of mammary glands and hairs on the skin. They commonly exhibit viviparity.
62                                                                                           BIOLOGY


                                            EXERCISES

      1. What are the difficulties that you would face in classification of animals, if common
         fundamental features are not taken into account?
      2. If you are given a specimen, what are the steps that you would follow to classify
         it?
      3. How useful is the study of the nature of body cavity and coelom in the
         classification of animals?
      4. Distinguish between intracellular and extracellular digestion?
      5. What is the difference between direct and indirect development?
      6. What are the peculiar features that you find in parasitic platyhelminthes?
      7. What are the reasons that you can think of for the arthropods to constitute the
         largest group of the animal kingdom?
      8. Water vascular system is the characteristic of which group of the following:
         (a) Porifera (b) Ctenophora (c) Echinodermata (d) Chordata
      9. “All vertebrates are chordates but all chordates are not vertebrates”. Justify the
         statement.
     10. How important is the presence of air bladder in Pisces?
     11. What are the modifications that are observed in birds that help them fly?
     12. Could the number of eggs or young ones produced by an oviparous and viviparous
         mother be equal? Why?
     13. Segmentation in the body is first observed in which of the following:
         (a) Platyhelminthes (b) Aschelminthes (c) Annelida (d) Arthropoda
     14. Match the following:
         (a) Operculum            (i) Ctenophora
         (b) Parapodia           (ii) Mollusca
         (c) Scales              (iii) Porifera
         (d) Comb plates         (iv) Reptilia
         (e) Radula              (v) Annelida
         (f ) Hairs              (vi) Cyclostomata and Chondrichthyes
         (g) Choanocytes        (vii) Mammalia
         (h) Gill slits         (viii) Osteichthyes
     15. Prepare a list of some animals that are found parasitic on human beings.
                             UNIT 2
                             STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION
                             IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS

Chapter 5                    The description of the diverse forms of life on earth was made only by
Morphology of                observation – through naked eyes or later through magnifying lenses
Flowering Plants             and microscopes. This description is mainly of gross structural features,
                             both external and internal. In addition, observable and perceivable
Chapter 6                    living phenomena were also recorded as part of this description. Before
Anatomy of Flowering         experimental biology or more specifically, physiology, was established
Plants                       as a part of biology, naturalists described only biology. Hence, biology
                             remained as a natural history for a long time. The description, by itself,
Chapter 7                    was amazing in terms of detail. While the initial reaction of a student
Structural Organisation in   could be boredom, one should keep in mind that the detailed description,
Animals                      was utilised in the later day reductionist biology where living processes
                             drew more attention from scientists than the description of life forms
                             and their structure. Hence, this description became meaningful and
                             helpful in framing research questions in physiology or evolutionary
                             biology. In the following chapters of this unit, the structural organisation
                             of plants and animals, including the structural basis of physiologial or
                             behavioural phenomena, is described. For convenience, this description
                             of morphological and anatomical features is presented separately for
                             plants and animals.
                 KATHERINE ESAU was born in Ukraine in 1898. She studied
                 agriculture in Russia and Germany and received her doctorate
                 in 1931 in United States. She reported in her early publications
                 that the curly top virus spreads through a plant via the food-
                 conducting or phloem tissue. Dr Esau’s Plant Anatomy published
                 in 1954 took a dynamic, developmental approach designed to
                 enhance one’s understanding of plant structure and an
                 enormous impact worldwide, literally bringing about a revival
                 of the discipline. The Anatomy of Seed Plants by Katherine Esau
                 was published in 1960. It was referred to as Webster’s of plant
                 biology – it is encyclopediac. In 1957 she was elected to the
                 National Academy of Sciences, becoming the sixth woman to
                 receive that honour. In addition to this prestigious award, she
                 received the National Medal of Science from President George
                 Bush in 1989.
                      When Katherine Esau died in the year 1997, Peter Raven,
                 director of Anatomy and Morphology, Missouri Botanical
                 Garden, remembered that she ‘absolutely dominated’ the field
Katherine Esau
                 of plant biology even at the age of 99.
 (1898 – 1997)
                        CHAPTER 5
                        MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
5.1 The Root            The wide range in the structure of higher plants will never fail to fascinate
                        us. Even though the angiosperms show such a large diversity in external
5.2 The Stem
                        structure or morphology, they are all characterised by presence of roots,
5.3 The Leaf            stems, leaves, flowers and fruits.
5.4 The Inflorescence       In chapters 2 and 3, we talked about classification of plants based
                        on morphological and other characteristics. For any successful attempt
5.5 The Flower
                        at classification and at understanding any higher plant (or for that
5.6 The Fruit           matter any living organism) we need to know standard technical terms
                        and standard definitions. We also need to know about the possible
5.7 The Seed
                        variations in different parts, found as adaptations of the plants to their
5.8 Semi-technical      environment, e.g., adaptions to various habitats, for protection,
    Description of a    climbing, storage, etc.
    Typical                 If you pull out any weed you will see that all of them have roots, stems
    Flowering Plant     and leaves. They may be bearing flowers and fruits. The underground
5.9 Description of      part of the flowering plant is the root system while the portion above the
    Some Important      ground forms the shoot system (Figure 5.1).
    Families

                        5.1 THE ROOT

                        In majority of the dicotyledonous plants, the direct elongation of the radicle
                        leads to the formation of primary root which grows inside the soil.
                        It bears lateral roots of several orders that are referred to as secondary,
                        tertiary, etc. roots. The primary roots and its branches constitute the
 66                                                                                            BIOLOGY



                                                           tap root system, as seen in the mustard
                                      Flower
                                                           plant (Figure 5.2a). In monocotyledonous
                                                           plants, the primary root is short lived and
                                                           is replaced by a large number of roots.
                                       Fruit
                                                           These roots originate from the base of the
                                       Stem                stem and constitute the fibrous root
                                        Leaf   Shoot       system, as seen in the wheat plant (Figure
                                               system
                                                           5.2b). In some plants, like grass,
                                                           Monstera and the banyan tree, roots arise
       Node                                                from parts of the plant other than the
           Internode   {      Bud
                                                           radicle and are called adventitious roots
                                                           (Figure 5.2c). The main functions of the
                                                           root system are absorption of water and
                                                           minerals from the soil, providing a proper
                                     Primary               anchorage to the plant parts, storing
                                     root      Root        reserve food material and synthesis of
                                     Secondary system      plant growth regulators.
                                     root



             Figure 5.1 Parts of a flowering plant




                       Main root




Laterals




                                    Fibrous roots                                    Adventitious roots


              (a)                        (b)                                   (c)



               Figure 5.2 Different types of roots : (a) Tap (b) Fibrous (c) Adventitious
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                           67


5.1.1    Regions of the Root
The root is covered at the apex by a thimble-like
structure called the root cap (Figure 5.3). It
protects the tender apex of the root as it makes
its way through the soil. A few millimetres above
the root cap is the region of meristematic
activity. The cells of this region are very small,
thin-walled and with dense protoplasm. They
divide repeatedly. The cells proximal to this
region undergo rapid elongation and
enlargement and are responsible for the growth
of the root in length. This region is called the
region of elongation. The cells of the elongation
zone gradually differentiate and mature. Hence,
this zone, proximal to region of elongation, is
called the region of maturation. From this
region some of the epidermal cells form very fine        Figure 5.3 The regions of the root-tip
and delicate, thread-like structures called root
hairs. These root hairs absorb water and
minerals from the soil.

5.1.2    Modifications of Root
Roots in some plants change their shape and
structure and become modified to perform
functions other than absorption and
conduction of water and minerals. They are
modified for support, storage of food and
respiration (Figure 5.4 and 5.5). Tap roots of
carrot, turnip and adventitious roots of sweet
potato, get swollen and store food. Can you give
some more such examples? Have you ever
wondered what those hanging structures that
support a banyan tree are? These are called
prop roots. Similarly, the stems of maize and
sugarcane have supporting roots coming out
of the lower nodes of the stem. These are called
stilt roots. In some plants such as Rhizophora
growing in swampy areas, many roots come out
of the ground and grow vertically upwards.
Such roots, called pneumatophores, help to           Figure 5.4   Modification of root for support:
get oxygen for respiration.                                       Banyan tree
68                                                                                        BIOLOGY




                        Turnip         Carrot       Sweet
                                                    potato
     Asparagus
                                      (a)                                           (b)
     Figure 5.5   Modification of root for : (a) storage (b) respiration: pneumatophore in
                  Rhizophora

                     5.2 THE STEM

                     What are the features that distinguish a stem from a root? The stem is the
                     ascending part of the axis bearing branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. It
                     develops from the plumule of the embryo of a germinating seed. The stem
                     bears nodes and internodes. The region of the stem where leaves are
                     born are called nodes while internodes are the portions between two nodes.
                     The stem bears buds, which may be terminal or axillary. Stem is generally
                     green when young and later often become woody and dark brown.
                         The main function of the stem is spreading out branches bearing
                     leaves, flowers and fruits. It conducts water, minerals and photosynthates.
                     Some stems perform the function of storage of food, support, protection
                     and of vegetative propagation.

                     5.2.1    Modifications of Stem
                     The stem may not always be typically like what they are expected to be.
                     They are modified to perform different functions (Figure 5.6). Underground
                     stems of potato, ginger, turmeric, zaminkand, Colocasia are modified to
                     store food in them. They also act as organs of perennation to tide over
                     conditions unfavourable for growth. Stem tendrils which develop from
                     axillary buds, are slender and spirally coiled and help plants to climb
                     such as in gourds (cucumber, pumpkins, watermelon) and grapevines.
                     Axillary buds of stems may also get modified into woody, straight and
                     pointed thorns. Thorns are found in many plants such as Citrus,
                     Bougainvillea. They protect plants from browsing animals. Some plants
                     of arid regions modify their stems into flattened (Opuntia), or fleshy
                     cylindrical (Euphorbia) structures. They contain chlorophyll and carry
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                              69




                                                                                       Stem modified
                                                                                       into tendril



                        (a)                                    (b)




                                 Stem modified
                                 into spine


                                                                                 Roots arising
                        (c)                                    (d)               from nodes



       Figure 5.6    Modifications of stem for : (a) storage (b) support (c) protection
                     (d) spread and vegetative propagation

out photosynthesis. Underground stems of some plants such as grass
and strawberry, etc., spread to new niches and when older parts die new
plants are formed. In plants like mint and jasmine a slender lateral branch
arises from the base of the main axis and after growing aerially for some
time arch downwards to touch the ground. A lateral branch with short
internodes and each node bearing a rosette of leaves and a tuft of roots is
found in aquatic plants like Pistia and Eichhornia. In banana, pineapple
and Chrysanthemum, the lateral branches originate from the basal and
underground portion of the main stem, grow horizontally beneath the
soil and then come out obliquely upward giving rise to leafy shoots.

5.3 THE LEAF
The leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. It
develops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud later
develops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems and
are arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetative
organs for photosynthesis.
    A typical leaf consists of three main parts: leaf base, petiole and lamina
(Figure 5.7 a). The leaf is attached to the stem by the leaf base and may
 70                                                                                            BIOLOGY


 Lamina                                         bear two lateral small leaf like structures called
                                                stipules. In monocotyledons, the leaf base expands
                                Stipule
                                                into a sheath covering the stem partially or wholly.
                                                In some leguminous plants the leafbase may
                                                become swollen, which is called the pulvinus. The
                                                petiole help hold the blade to light. Long thin flexible
                            Petiole             petioles allow leaf blades to flutter in wind, thereby
                                     Axillary   cooling the leaf and bringing fresh air to leaf surface.
                         Leaf        bud
                   (a)   base                   The lamina or the leaf blade is the green expanded
                                                part of the leaf with veins and veinlets. There is,
                                                usually, a middle prominent vein, which is known
                                                as the midrib. Veins provide rigidity to the leaf blade
                                                and act as channels of transport for water, minerals
                                                and food materials. The shape, margin, apex, surface
                                                and extent of incision of lamina varies in different
                                                leaves.

                                                5.3.1    Venation
                                                The arrangement of veins and the veinlets in the
                                                lamina of leaf is termed as venation. When the
                                                veinlets form a network, the venation is termed as
                                                reticulate (Figure 5.7 b). When the veins run
                                                parallel to each other within a lamina, the venation
                                                is termed as parallel (Figure 5.7 c). Leaves of
       (b)                         (c)
                                                dicotyledonous plants generally possess reticulate
Figure 5.7    Structure of a leaf :             venation, while parallel venation is the characteristic
              (a) Parts of a leaf               of most monocotyledons.
              (b) Reticulate venation
              (c) Parallel venation
                                                5.3.2    Types of Leaves
                                                A leaf is said to be simple, when its lamina is entire
                                                or when incised, the incisions do not touch the
                                                midrib. When the incisions of the lamina reach up
                                                to the midrib breaking it into a number of leaflets,
                                                the leaf is called compound. A bud is present
                                                in the axil of petiole in both simple and compound
                                                leaves, but not in the axil of leaflets of the compound
                                                leaf.
                                                    The compound leaves may be of two types
                                                (Figure 5.8). In a pinnately compound leaf a
             (a)                    (b)
                                                number of leaflets are present on a common axis,
Figure 5.8     Compound leaves :
                                                the rachis, which represents the midrib of the leaf
               (a) pinnately compound leaf
               (b) palmately compound leaf      as in neem.
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                            71


    In palmately compound leaves, the
leaflets are attached at a common point, i.e.,
at the tip of petiole, as in silk cotton.

5.3.3    Phyllotaxy
Phyllotaxy is the pattern of arrangement of
leaves on the stem or branch. This is usually
of three types – alternate, opposite and                        (a)                      (b)
whorled (Figure 5.9). In alternate type of
phyllotaxy, a single leaf arises at each node
in alternate manner, as in china rose,
mustard and sun flower plants. In opposite
type, a pair of leaves arise at each node and
lie opposite to each other as in Calotropis
and guava plants. If more than two leaves
arise at a node and form a whorl, it is called                             (c)
whorled, as in Alstonia.                               Figure 5.9 Different types of phyllotaxy :
                                                                  (a) Alternate (b) Opposite
                                                                  (c) Whorled
5.3.4    Modifications of Leaves
                                                                                           Leaves
Leaves are often modified to perform                                                       modified
                                                                       Leaf
functions other than photosynthesis. They                             tendril              into spines
are converted into tendrils for climbing as
in peas or into spines for defence as in cacti
(Figure 5.10 a, b). The fleshy leaves of onion
and garlic store food (Figure 5.10c). In some
plants such as Australian acacia, the leaves
are small and short-lived. The petioles in
these plants expand, become green and
synthesise food. Leaves of certain
insectivorous plants such as pitcher plant,
venus-fly trap are also modified leaves.
                                                              (a)               (b)

5.4 THE INFLORESCENCE

A flower is a modified shoot wherein the shoot
apical meristem changes to floral meristem.
Internodes do not elongate and the axis gets
condensed. The apex produces different               Fleshy
kinds of floral appendages laterally at              leaves               (c)
successive nodes instead of leaves. When a         Figure 5.10 Modifications of leaf for :
shoot tip transforms into a flower, it is always               (a) support: tendril (b) protection:
solitary. The arrangement of flowers on the                    spines (c) storage: fleshy leaves
72                                                                                    BIOLOGY


                                         floral axis is termed as inflorescence. Depending
                                         on whether the apex gets converted into a flower or
                                         continues to grow, two major types of inflorescences
                                         are defined – racemose and cymose. In racemose
                                         type of inflorescences the main axis continues to
                                         grow, the flowers are borne laterally in an acropetal
                                         succession (Figure 5.11).
                                             In cymose type of inflorescence the main axis
                                         terminates in a flower, hence is limited in growth.The
                                         flowers are borne in a basipetal order (Figure 5.12).

                                         5.5 THE FLOWER
                                         The flower is the reproductive unit in the
                                         angiosperms. It is meant for sexual reproduction.
                                         A typical flower has four different kinds of whorls
                                         arranged successively on the swollen end of the
                                         stalk or pedicel, called thalamus or receptacle.
                                         These are calyx, corolla, androecium and
 Figure 5.11    Racemose inflorescence   gynoecium. Calyx and corolla are accessory organs,
                                         while androecium and gynoecium are reproductive
                                         organs. In some flowers like lily, the calyx and
                                          corolla are not distinct and are termed as perianth.
                                          When a flower has both androecium and
                                          gynoecium, it is bisexual. A flower having either
                                          only stamens or only carpels is unisexual.
                                              In symmetry, the flower may be
                                          actinomorphic (radial symmetry) or
                                          zygomorphic (bilateral symmetry). When a flower
                                          can be divided into two equal radial halves in any
                                          radial plane passing through the centre, it is said
                                          to be actinomorphic, e.g., mustard, datura, chilli.
                                          When it can be divided into two similar halves only
     Figure 5.12 Cymose inflorescence
                                          in one particular vertical plane, it is zygomorphic,
                                          e.g., pea, gulmohur, bean, Cassia. A flower is
                                         asymmetric (irregular) if it cannot be divided into
                                         two similar halves by any vertical plane passing
                                         through the centre, as in canna.
                                              A flower may be trimerous, tetramerous or
                                         pentamerous when the floral appendages are in
                                         multiple of 3, 4 or 5, respectively. Flowers
                                         with bracts -reduced leaf found at the base of the
                                         pedicel - are called bracteate and those without
                                         bracts, ebracteate.
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                             73




                (a)                    (b)                     (c)              (d)

        Figure 5.13 Position of floral parts on thalamus : (a) Hypogynous (b)         and (c)
                    Perigynous (d) Epigynous

    Based on the position of calyx, corolla and androecium in respect of
the ovary on thalamus, the flowers are described as hypogynous,
perigynous and epigynous (Figure 5.13). In the hypogynous flower the
gynoecium occupies the highest position while the other parts are situated
below it. The ovary in such flowers is said to be superior, e.g., mustard,
china rose and brinjal. If gynoecium is situated in the centre and other
parts of the flower are located on the rim of the thalamus almost at the
same level, it is called perigynous. The ovary here is said to be half
inferior, e.g., plum, rose, peach. In epigynous flowers, the margin of
thalamus grows upward enclosing the ovary completely and getting fused
with it, the other parts of flower arise above the ovary. Hence, the ovary is
said to be inferior as in flowers of guava and cucumber, and the ray
florets of sunflower.

5.5.1     Parts of a Flower
Each flower normally has four floral whorls, viz., calyx, corolla,
androecium and gynoecium (Figure 5.14).

5.5.1.1    Calyx
The calyx is the outermost whorl of the flower and the members are called
sepals. Generally, sepals are green, leaf like and protect the flower in the
bud stage. The calyx may be gamosepalous (sepals united) or
polysepalous (sepals free).

5.5.1.2    Corolla
Corolla is composed of petals. Petals are usually brightly coloured to
attract insects for pollination. Like calyx, corolla may be also united
74                                                                                          BIOLOGY




                      Androecium

                      Gynoecium
                         Corolla
                           Calyx
                      Pedicel

                                   Figure 5.14 Parts of a flower

                      gamopetalous (petals united) or polypetalous (petals free). The shape
                      and colour of corolla vary greatly in plants. Corolla may be tubular, bell-
                      shaped, funnel-shaped or wheel-shaped.
                      Aestivation: The mode of arrangement of sepals or petals in floral bud
                      with respect to the other members of the same whorl is known as
                      aestivation. The main types of aestivation are valvate, twisted, imbricate
                      and vexillary (Figure 5.15). When sepals or petals in a whorl just touch
                      one another at the margin, without overlapping, as in Calotropis, it is
                      said to be valvate. If one margin of the appendage overlaps that of the
                      next one and so on as in china rose, lady’s finger and cotton, it is called
                      twisted. If the margins of sepals or petals overlap one another but not in
                      any particular direction as in Cassia and gulmohur, the aestivation is
                      called imbricate. In pea and bean flowers, there are five petals, the largest
                      (standard) overlaps the two lateral petals (wings) which in turn overlap
                      the two smallest anterior petals (keel); this type of aestivation is known
                      as vexillary or papilionaceous.




                     (a)                (b)                (c)                (d)


 Figure 5.15 Types of aestivation in corolla : (a) Valvate (b) Twisted (c) Imbricate (d) Vexillary
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                             75

                                                                                 (
                                                                              )a
5.5.1.3    Androecium
Androecium is composed of stamens. Each stamen which
represents the male reproductive organ consists of a stalk or a
filament and an anther. Each anther is usually bilobed and each
lobe has two chambers, the pollen-sacs. The pollen grains are
produced in pollen-sacs. A sterile stamen is called staminode.                       (a)
     Stamens of flower may be united with other members such as
petals or among themselves. When stamens are attached to the
petals, they are epipetalous as in brinjal, or epiphyllous when
attached to the perianth as in the flowers of lily. The stamens in a
flower may either remain free (polyandrous) or may be united in
varying degrees. The stamens may be united into one bunch or
one bundle (monoadelphous) as in china rose, or two bundles
(diadelphous) as in pea, or into more than two bundles                                (b)
(polyadelphous) as in citrus. There may be a variation in the length
of filaments within a flower, as in Salvia and mustard.

5.5.1.4    Gynoecium
Gynoecium is the female reproductive part of the flower and is made
up of one or more carpels. A carpel consists of three parts namely
stigma, style and ovary. Ovary is the enlarged basal part, on which
lies the elongated tube, the style. The style connects the ovary to the               (c)
stigma. The stigma is usually at the tip of the style and is the
receptive surface for pollen grains. Each ovary bears one or more
ovules attached to a flattened, cushion-like placenta. When more
than one carpel is present, they may be free (as in lotus and rose)
and are called apocarpous. They are termed syncarpous when
carpels are fused, as in mustard and tomato. After fertilisation, the
ovules develop into seeds and the ovary matures into a fruit.
                                                                                      (d)
Placentation: The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known
as placentation. The placentation are of different types namely,
marginal, axile, parietal, basal, central and free central (Figure 5.16).
In marginal placentation the placenta forms a ridge along the
ventral suture of the ovary and the ovules are borne on this ridge
forming two rows, as in pea. When the placenta is axial and the
ovules are attached to it in a multilocular ovary, the placentaion is                 (e)
said to be axile, as in china rose, tomato and lemon. In parietal
                                                                          Figure 5.16 Types of
placentation, the ovules develop on the inner wall of the ovary or                    placentation :
on peripheral part. Ovary is one-chambered but it becomes two-                        (a) Marginal
chambered due to the formation of the false septum, e.g., mustard                     (b) Axile
                                                                                      (c) Parietal
and Argemone. When the ovules are borne on central axis and                           (d) Free central
septa are absent, as in Dianthus and Primrose the placentation is                     (e) Basal
76                                                                        BIOLOGY


     called free central. In basal placentation, the placenta develops at the
     base of ovary and a single ovule is attached to it, as in sunflower, marigold.


     5.6 THE FRUIT

     The fruit is a characteristic feature of the flowering plants. It is a mature
     or ripened ovary, developed after fertilisation. If a fruit is formed without
     fertilisation of the ovary, it is called a parthenocarpic fruit.
         Generally, the fruit consists of a wall or pericarp and seeds. The
     pericarp may be dry or fleshy. When pericarp is thick and fleshy, it is
     differentiated into the outer epicarp, the middle mesocarp and the inner
     endocarp.




                    (a)                              (b)

                Figure 5.17 Parts of a fruit : (a) Mango (b) Coconut

        In mango and coconut, the fruit is known as a drupe (Figure 5.17).
     They develop from monocarpellary superior ovaries and are one seeded.
     In mango the pericarp is well differentiated into an outer thin epicarp, a
     middle fleshy edible mesocarp and an inner stony hard endocarp. In
     coconut which is also a drupe, the mesocarp is fibrous.


     5.7 THE SEED

     The ovules after fertilisation, develop into seeds. A seed is made up of a
     seed coat and an embryo. The embryo is made up of a radicle, an embryonal
     axis and one (as in wheat, maize) or two cotyledons (as in gram and pea).

     5.7.1    Structure of a Dicotyledonous Seed
     The outermost covering of a seed is the seed coat. The seed coat has two
     layers, the outer testa and the inner tegmen. The hilum is a scar on the
     seed coat through which the developing seeds were attached to the fruit.
     Above the hilum is a small pore called the micropyle. Within the seed
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                             77


coat is the embryo, consisting of an                Seed coat
                                                                        Cotyledon
embryonal axis and two cotyledons. The                                                   Plumule
cotyledons are often fleshy and full of reserve
food materials. At the two ends of the
embryonal axis are present the radicle and
the plumule (Figure 5.18). In some seeds
                                                                Hilum
such as castor the endosperm formed as a                                              Radicle
result of double fertilisation, is a food storing          Micropyle
tissue. In plants such as bean, gram and
pea, the endosperm is not present in mature         Figure 5.18 Structure of dicotyledonous seed
seeds and such seeds are called non-
endospermous.

5.7.2      Structure of Monocotyledonous Seed
Generally, monocotyledonous seeds are endospermic but some as in
orchids are non-endospermic. In the seeds of cereals such as maize the
seed coat is membranous and generally fused with the fruit wall. The
endosperm is bulky and stores food. The outer covering of endosperm
separates the embryo by a proteinous layer called aleurone layer. The
embryo is small and situated in a groove at one end of the endosperm. It
consists of one large and shield shaped cotyledon known as scutellum
and a short axis with a plumule and a radicle. The plumule and radicle
are enclosed in sheaths which are called coleoptile and coleorhiza
respectively (Figure 5.19).




                           Seed coat & fruit-wall                           Endosperm


                                   Aleurone layer
                                                                            Scutellum

                                                                            Coleoptile
                                  Endosperm
                                                                            Plumule

                                 Embryo
                                                                            Radicle
                                                                            Coleorhiza


                        Figure 5.19 Structure of a monocotyledonous seed
 78                                                                                    BIOLOGY


                                  5.8 SEMI-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION              OF A   TYPICAL
                                      FLOWERING PLANT
                                  Various morphological features are used to describe a
                                  flowering plant. The description has to be brief, in a simple
                                  and scientific language and presented in a proper
                                  sequence. The plant is described beginning with its habit,
                                  vegetative characters – roots, stem and leaves and then
                                  floral characters inflorescence and flower parts. After
                                  describing various parts of plant, a floral diagram and a
                                  floral formula are presented. The floral formula is
                                  represented by some symbols. In the floral formula, Br
                                  stands for bracteate K stands for calyx , C for corolla, P for
                                  perianth, A for androecium and G for Gynoecium, G for
            K2+2 C4 A2+4 G(2)     superior ovary and G for inferior ovary,     for male, for
        ⊕
                                  female,    for bisexual plants, ⊕ for actinomorphic and
Figure 5.20 Floral diagram with   for zygomorphic nature of flower. Fusion is indicated by
            floral formula        enclosing the figure within bracket and adhesion by a line
                                  drawn above the symbols of the floral parts. A floral
                                  diagram provides information about the number of parts
                                  of a flower, their arrangement and the relation they have
                                  with one another (Figure 5.20). The position of the mother
                                  axis with respect to the flower is represented by a dot on
                                  the top of the floral diagram. Calyx, corolla, androecium
                                  and gynoecium are drawn in successive whorls, calyx being
                                  the outermost and the gynoecium being in the centre.
                                  Floral formula also shows cohesion and adhesion within
                                  parts of whorls and between whorls. The floral diagram
                                  and floral formula in Figure 5.20 represents the mustard
                                  plant (Family: Brassicaceae).


                                  5.9     DESCRIPTION     OF   SOME IMPORTANT FAMILIES
                                  5.9.1    Fabaceae
                                  This family was earlier called Papilionoideae, a subfamily
                                  of family Leguminosae. It is distributed all over the world
                                  (Figure 5.21).
                                  Vegetative Characters
                                  Trees, shrubs, herbs; root with root nodules
                                  Stem: erect or climber
                                  Leaves: alternate, pinnately compound or simple; leaf base,
                                  pulvinate; stipulate; venation reticulate.
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                         79




                                               (b)

                                                       (c)




                                                         (e)                    (f)
             (a)                         (d)



         Figure 5.21 Pisum sativum (pea) plant : (a) Flowering twig (b) Flower (c) Petals
                      (d) Reproductive parts (e) L.S.carpel (f) Floral diagram


Floral characters
Inflorescence: racemose
Flower: bisexual, zygomorphic
Calyx: sepals five, gamosepalous; valvate/imbricate aestivation
Corolla: petals five, polypetalous, papilionaceous, consisting of a posterior
standard, two lateral wings, two anterior ones forming a keel (enclosing
stamens and pistil), vexillary aestivation
Androecium: ten, diadelphous, anther dithecous
Gynoecium: ovary superior, mono carpellary, unilocular with many
ovules, style single
Fruit: legume; seed: one to many, non-endospermic
Floral Formula: %       K(5) C1+2+(2) A(9)+1 G1
Economic importance
Many plants belonging to the family are sources of pulses (gram, arhar,
sem, moong, soyabean; edible oil (soyabean, groundnut); dye (Indigofera);
fibres (sunhemp); fodder (Sesbania, Trifolium), ornamentals (lupin, sweet
pea); medicine (muliathi).

5.9.2 Solanaceae
It is a large family, commonly called as the ‘potato family’. It is widely
distributed in tropics, subtropics and even temperate zones (Figure 5.22).
Vegetative Characters
Plants mostly herbs, shrubs and rarely small trees
Stem: herbaceous rarely woody, aerial; erect, cylindrical, branched, solid
80                                                                                 BIOLOGY




                                                                   (d)
                                             (b)
                                                        (c)




                  (a)
                                             (e)                   (f)

     Figure 5.22 Solanum nigrum (makoi) plant : (a) Flowering twig (b) Flower
                 (c) L.S. of flower (d) Stamens (e) Carpel (f) Floral diagram



                  or hollow, hairy or glabrous, underground stem in potato (Solanum
                  tuberosum)
                  Leaves: alternate, simple, rarely pinnately compound, exstipulate;
                  venation reticulate
                  Floral Characters
                  Inflorescence : Solitary, axillary or cymose as in Solanum
                  Flower: bisexual, actinomorphic
                  Calyx: sepals five, united, persistent, valvate aestivation
                  Corolla: petals five, united; valvate aestivation
                  Androecium: stamens five, epipetalous
                  Gynoecium: bicarpellary, syncarpous; ovary superior, bilocular, placenta
                  swollen with many ovules
                  Fruits: berry or capsule
                  Seeds: many, endospermous
                  Floral Formula: ⊕
                  Economic Importance
                  Many plants belonging to this family are source of food (tomato, brinjal,
                  potato), spice (chilli); medicine (belladonna, ashwagandha); fumigatory
                  (tobacco); ornamentals (petunia).
     MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                     81


5.9.3 Liliaceae
Commonly called the ‘Lily family’ is a characteristic representative of
monocotyledonous plants. It is distributed world wide (Figure 5.23).
Vegetative characters: Perennial herbs with underground bulbs/corms/
rhizomes
Leaves mostly basal, alternate, linear, exstipulate with parallel venation
Floral characters
Inflorescence: solitary / cymose; often umbellate clusters
Flower: bisexual; actinomorphic
Perianth tepal six (3+3), often united into tube; valvate aestivation
Androecium: stamen six, 3+3, epitepalous
Gynoecium: tricarpellary, syncarpous, ovary superior, trilocular with
many ovules; axile placentation
Fruit: capsule, rarely berry
Seed: endospermous
Floral Formula: Br ⊕ P(3+3) A3+3 G(3)
Economic Importance
Many plants belonging to this family are good ornamentals (tulip,
Gloriosa), source of medicine (Aloe), vegetables (Asparagus), and
colchicine (Colchicum autumnale).




                                                 (c)


                                                                                (d)
                               (b)


              (a)

       Figure 5.23 Allium cepa (onion) plant : (a) Plant (b) Inflorescence (c) Flower
                   (d) Floral diagram
82                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                                            SUMMARY

     Flowering plants exhibit enormous variation in shape, size, structure, mode of
     nutrition, life span, habit and habitat. They have well developed root and shoot
     systems. Root system is either tap root or fibrous. Generally, dicotyledonous plants
     have tap roots while monocotyledonous plants have fibrous roots. The roots in
     some plants get modified for storage of food, mechanical support and respiration.
     The shoot system is differentiated into stem, leaves, flowers and fruits. The
     morphological features of stems like the presence of nodes and internodes,
     multicellular hair and positively phototropic nature help to differentiate the stems
     from roots. Stems also get modified to perform diverse functions such as storage
     of food, vegetative propagation and protection under different conditions. Leaf is a
     lateral outgrowth of stem developed exogeneously at the node. These are green in
     colour to perform the function of photosynthesis. Leaves exhibit marked variations
     in their shape, size, margin, apex and extent of incisions of leaf blade (lamina).
     Like other parts of plants, the leaves also get modified into other structures such
     as tendrils, spines for climbing and protection respectively.
          The flower is a modified shoot, meant for sexual reproduction. The flowers are
     arranged in different types of inflorescences. They exhibit enormous variation in
     structure, symmetry, position of ovary in relation to other parts, arrangement of
     petals, sepals, ovules etc. After fertilisation, the ovary is converted into fruits and
     ovules into seeds. Seeds either may be monocotyledonous or dicotyledonous. They
     vary in shape, size and period of viability. The floral characteristics form the basis
     of classification and identification of flowering plants. This can be illustrated
     through semi-technical descriptions of families. Hence, a flowering plant is
     described in a definite sequence by using scientific terms. The floral features are
     represented in the summarised form as floral diagrams and floral formula.



                                            EXERCISES

      1. What is meant by modification of root? What type of modification of root is found
         in the:
          (a) Banyan tree (b) Turnip (c) Mangrove trees
      2. Justify the following statements on the basis of external features:
          (i) Underground parts of a plant are not always roots.
          (ii) Flower is a modified shoot.
      3. How is a pinnately compound leaf different from a palmately compound leaf?
      4. Explain with suitable examples the different types of phyllotaxy.
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                          83


   5. Define the following terms:
      (a) aestivation           (b) placentation      (c) actinomorphic
      (d) zygomorphic           (e) superior ovary    (f) perigynous flower
      (g) epipetalous stamen
   6. Differentiate between
      (a) Racemose and cymose inflorescence
      (b) Fibrous root and adventitious root
      (c) Apocarpous and syncarpous ovary
   7. Draw the labelled diagram of the following:
      (i) gram seed (ii) V.S. of maize seed
   8. Describe modifications of stem with suitable examples.
   9. Take one flower each of the families Fabaceae and Solanaceae and write its
      semi-technical description. Also draw their floral diagram after studying them.

  10. Describe the various types of placentations found in flowering plants.
  11. What is a flower? Describe the parts of a typical angiosperm flower.
  12. How do the various leaf modifications help plants?
  13. Define the term inflorescence. Explain the basis for the different types
      inflorescence in flowering plants.
  14. Write the floral formula of a actinomorphic, bisexual, hypogynous flower with
      five united sepals, five free petals, five free stamens and two united carples
      with superior ovary and axile placentation.
  15. Describe the arrangement of floral members in relation to their insertion on
      thalamus.
  142                                                                                                 BIOLOGY




                                CHAPTER 9
                                BIOMOLECULES
9.1 How to Analyse         There is a wide diversity in living organisms in our biosphere. Now a
    Chemical               question that arises in our minds is: Are all living organisms made of the
    Composition?           same chemicals, i.e., elements and compounds? You have learnt in
9.2 Primary and            chemistry how elemental analysis is performed. If we perform such an
    Secondary              analysis on a plant tissue, animal tissue or a microbial paste, we obtain a
    Metabolites            list of elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and several others and
9.3 Biomacromolecules      their respective content per unit mass of a living tissue. If the same analysis
9.4 Proteins
                           is performed on a piece of earth’s crust as an example of non-living matter,
                           we obtain a similar list. What are the differences between the two lists? In
9.5 Polysaccharides
                           absolute terms, no such differences could be made out. All the elements
9.6 Nucleic Acids          present in a sample of earth’s crust are also present in a sample of living
9.7 Structure of           tissue. However, a closer examination reveals that the relative abundance
    Proteins               of carbon and hydrogen with respect to other elements is higher in any
9.8 Nature of Bond         living organism than in earth’s crust (Table 9.1).
    Linking Monomers
    in a Polymer           9.1 HOW TO ANALYSE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION?
9.9 Dynamic State of
                           We can continue asking in the same way, what type of organic compounds
    Body Constituents
    - Concept of
                           are found in living organisms? How does one go about finding the answer?
    Metabolism             To get an answer, one has to perform a chemical analysis. We can take any
                           living tissue (a vegetable or a piece of liver, etc.) and grind it in trichloroacetic
9.10 Metabolic Basis for
                           acid (Cl3CCOOH) using a mortar and a pestle. We obtain a thick slurry. If
    Living
                           we were to strain this through a cheesecloth or cotton we would obtain two
9.11 The Living State
                           fractions. One is called the filtrate or more technically, the acid-soluble
9.12 Enzymes               pool, and the second, the retentate or the acid-insoluble fraction. Scientists
                           have found thousands of organic compounds in the acid-soluble pool.
     BIOMOLECULES                                                                                 143


    In higher classes you will learn about how TABLE 9.1 A Comparison of Elements Present
to analyse a living tissue sample and identify a                   in Non-living and Living Matter*
particular organic compound. It will suffice to       Element                    % Weight of
say here that one extracts the compounds, then                             Earth’s crust Human body
subjects the extract to various separation            Hydrogen (H)              0.14            0.5
techniques till one has separated a compound          Carbon (C)                0.03           18.5
from all other compounds. In other words, one         Oxygen (O)               46.6            65.0
                                                      Nitrogen (N)           very little        3.3
isolates and purifies a compound. Analytical
                                                      Sulphur (S)               0.03            0.3
techniques, when applied to the compound give         Sodium (Na)               2.8             0.2
us an idea of the molecular formula and the           Calcium (Ca)              3.6             1.5
probable structure of the compound. All the           Magnesium      (Mg)       2.1             0.1
carbon compounds that we get from living              Silicon  (Si)            27.7           negligible
tissues can be called ‘biomolecules’. However,        * Adapted from CNR Rao, Understanding Chemistry,
                                                      Universities Press, Hyderabad.
living organisms have also got inorganic
elements and compounds in them. How do we
know this? A slightly different but destructive
experiment has to be done. One weighs a small
amount of a living tissue (say a leaf or liver and
this is called wet weight) and dry it. All the water,
evaporates. The remaining material gives dry
                                                      TABLE 9.2 A List of Representative Inorganic
weight. Now if the tissue is fully burnt, all the                  Constituents of Living Tissues
carbon compounds are oxidised to gaseous
                                                         Component                  Formula
form (CO2, water vapour) and are removed. What
is remaining is called ‘ash’. This ash contains          Sodium                     Na+
inorganic elements (like calcium, magnesium              Potassium                  K+
etc). Inorganic compounds like sulphate,                 Calcium                    Ca++
phosphate, etc., are also seen in the acid-soluble       Magnesium                  Mg++
fraction. Therefore elemental analysis gives             Water                      H2O
elemental composition of living tissues in the           Compounds                  NaCl, CaCO3,
form of hydrogen, oxygen, chlorine, carbon etc.
                                                                                    PO34 − , SO24 −
while analysis for compounds gives an idea of
the kind of organic (Figure 9.1) and inorganic constituents (Table 9.2)
present in living tissues. From a chemistry point of view, one can identify
functional groups like aldehydes, ketones, aromatic compounds, etc. But
from a biological point of view, we shall classify them into amino acids,
nucleotide bases, fatty acids etc.
    Amino acids are organic compounds containing an amino group and
an acidic group as substituents on the same carbon i.e., the α-carbon.
Hence, they are called α-amino acids. They are substituted methanes. There
are four substituent groups occupying the four valency positions. These
are hydrogen, carboxyl group, amino group and a variable group
designated as R group. Based on the nature of R group there are many
amino acids. However, those which occur in proteins are only of twenty
144                                                                        BIOLOGY


      types. The R group in these proteinaceous amino acids could be a hydrogen
      (the amino acid is called glycine), a methyl group (alanine), hydroxy methyl
      (serine), etc. Three of the twenty are shown in Figure 9.1.
            The chemical and physical properties of amino acids are essentially
      of the amino, carboxyl and the R functional groups. Based on number of
      amino and carboxyl groups, there are acidic (e.g., glutamic acid), basic
      (lysine) and neutral (valine) amino acids. Similarly, there are aromatic
      amino acids (tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan). A particular property
      of amino acids is the ionizable nature of –NH2 and –COOH groups. Hence
      in solutions of different pHs, the structure of amino acids changes.




         B is called zwitterionic form.

           Lipids are generally water insoluble. They could be simple fatty acids.
      A fatty acid has a carboxyl group attached to an R group. The R group
      could be a methyl (–CH3), or ethyl (–C2H5) or higher number of –CH2
      groups (1 carbon to 19 carbons). For example, palmitic acid has 16
      carbons including carboxyl carbon. Arachidonic acid has 20 carbon
      atoms including the carboxyl carbon. Fatty acids could be saturated
      (without double bond) or unsaturated (with one or more C=C double
      bonds). Another simple lipid is glycerol which is trihydroxy propane. Many
      lipids have both glycerol and fatty acids. Here the fatty acids are found
      esterified with glycerol. They can be then monoglycerides, diglycerides
      and triglycerides. These are also called fats and oils based on melting
      point. Oils have lower melting point (e.g., gingely oil) and hence remain as
      oil in winters. Can you identify a fat from the market? Some lipids have
      phosphorous and a phosphorylated organic compound in them. These
      are phospholipids. They are found in cell membrane. Lecithin is one
      example. Some tissues especially the neural tissues have lipids with more
      complex structures.
           Living organisms have a number of carbon compounds in which
      heterocyclic rings can be found. Some of these are nitrogen bases –
      adenine, guanine, cytosine, uracil, and thymine. When found attached to
      a sugar, they are called nucleosides. If a phosphate group is also found
      esterified to the sugar they are called nucleotides. Adenosine, guanosine,
      thymidine, uridine and cytidine are nucleosides. Adenylic acid, thymidylic
      acid, guanylic acid, uridylic acid and cytidylic acid are nucleotides. Nucleic
      acids like DNA and RNA consist of nucleotides only. DNA and RNA function
      as genetic material.
  BIOMOLECULES                                                                                       145


     CH2OH               HOCH2      O
         O
                                          OH
HO   OH           OH
                               OH       OH
             OH
                                                           Glycine     Alanine             Serine
C6H12O6 (Glucose)            C5H10O5 (Ribose)
                                                                     Amino acids
          Sugars (Carbohydrates)



      CH3 (CH2)14      COOH
             Fatty acid
           (Palmitic acid)

                                                Glycerol                 Triglyceride (R1, R2
                                                                       and R3 are fatty acids)




     Phospholipid (Lecithin)                                                 Cholesterol
                                                           HO

                                          Fats and oils (lipids)


                                          HOCH2       O    Adenine


                                                                         O
                                                                                      O    Adenine
                                                                     HO P OCH2
                                                                        OH
                                                 OH        OH
      Adenine (Purine)
                                                 Adenosine
              O
                                         HOCH2      O      Uracil                OH        OH
      HN                                                                       Adenylic acid
      O




              N
              H                                  OH     OH
  Uracil (Pyrimidine)                             Uridine
     Nitrogen bases                             Nucleosides                       Nucleotide

      Figure 9.1       Diagrammatic representation of small molecular weight organic
                       compounds in living tissues
146                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                       9.2 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY METABOLITES

                      The most exciting aspect of chemistry deals with isolating thousands of
                      compounds, small and big, from living organisms, determining their
                      structure and if possible synthesising them.
                           If one were to make a list of biomolecules, such a list would have
                      thousands of organic compounds including amino acids, sugars, etc.
                      For reasons that are given in section 9.10, we can call these biomolecules
                      as ‘metabolites’. In animal tissues, one notices the presence of all such
                      categories of compounds shown in Figure 9.1. These are called primary
                      metabolites. However, when one analyses plant, fungal and microbial cells,
                      one would see thousands of compounds other than these called primary
                      metabolites, e.g. alkaloids, flavonoids, rubber, essential oils, antibiotics,
                                                coloured pigments, scents, gums, spices. These
 TABLE 9.3 Some Secondary Metabolites
                                                are called secondary metabolites (Table 9.3).
Pigments       Carotenoids, Anthocyanins,       While primary metabolites have identifiable
               etc.
                                                functions and play known roles in normal
Alkaloids      Morphine, Codeine, etc.          physiologial processes, we do not at the moment,
Terpenoides Monoterpenes, Diterpenes etc.       understand the role or functions of all the
Essential oils Lemon grass oil, etc.            ‘secondary metabolites’ in host organisms.
Toxins         Abrin, Ricin                     However, many of them are useful to ‘human
Lectins        Concanavalin A                   welfare’ (e.g., rubber, drugs, spices, scents and
Drugs          Vinblastin, curcumin, etc.       pigments). Some secondary metabolites have
Polymeric      Rubber, gums, cellulose
                                                ecological importance. In the later chapters and
substances                                      years you will learn more about this.

                       9.3 BIOMACROMOLECULES
                       There is one feature common to all those compounds found in the acid
                       soluble pool. They have molecular weights ranging from 18 to around
                       800 daltons (Da) approximately.
                            The acid insoluble fraction, has only four types of organic compounds
                       i.e., proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides and lipids. These classes of
                       compounds with the exception of lipids, have molecular weights in the
                       range of ten thousand daltons and above. For this very reason,
                       biomolecules, i.e., chemical compounds found in living organisms are of
                       two types. One, those which have molecular weights less than one
                       thousand dalton and are usually referred to as micromolecules or simply
                       biomolecules while those which are found in the acid insoluble fraction
                       are called macromolecules or biomacromolecules.
                            The molecules in the insoluble fraction with the exception of lipids
                       are polymeric substances. Then why do lipids, whose molecular weights
                       do not exceed 800 Da, come under acid insoluble fraction, i.e.,
                       macromolecular fraction? Lipids are indeed small molecular weight
    BIOMOLECULES                                                                              147


compounds and are present not only as such but also
arranged into structures like cell membrane and other
membranes. When we grind a tissue, we are disrupting
the cell structure. Cell membrane and other
membranes are broken into pieces, and form vesicles
which are not water soluble. Therefore, these
membrane fragments in the form of vesicles get
separated along with the acid insoluble pool and hence
in the macromolecular fraction. Lipids are not strictly
macromolecules.
    The acid soluble pool represents roughly the
cytoplasmic composition. The macromolecules from TABLE 9.4 Average Composition of Cells
cytoplasm and organelles become the acid insoluble
fraction. Together they represent the entire chemical
                                                        Component     % of the total
composition of living tissues or organisms.                           cellular mass
    In summary if we represent the chemical             Water             70-90
composition of living tissue from abundance point of
                                                        Proteins          10-15
view and arrange them class-wise, we observe that
                                                        Carbohydrates        3
water is the most abundant chemical in living
                                                        Lipids               2
organisms (Table 9.4).
                                                           Nucleic acids             5-7
                                                           Ions                       1
9.4 PROTEINS

Proteins are polypeptides. They are linear chains of
amino acids linked by peptide bonds as shown in
Figure 9.3.
     Each protein is a polymer of amino acids. As there
are 20 types of amino acids (e.g., alanine, cysteine,
proline, tryptophan, lysine, etc.), a protein is a
heteropolymer and not a homopolymer. A                    TABLE 9.5 Some Proteins and their
                                                                      Functions
homopolymer has only one type of monomer repeating
‘n’ number of times. This information about the amino      Protein          Functions
acid content is important as later in your nutrition       Collagen    Intercellular ground
lessons, you will learn that certain amino acids are                   substance
essential for our health and they have to be supplied      Trypsin     Enzyme
through our diet. Hence, dietary proteins are the          Insulin     Hormone
source of essential amino acids. Therefore, amino acids    Antibody    Fights infectious agents
can be essential or non-essential. The latter are those
                                                           Receptor    Sensory reception
which our body can make, while we get essential amino                  (smell, taste, hormone,
acids through our diet/food. Proteins carry out many                   etc.)
functions in living organisms, some transport              GLUT-4      Enables glucose
nutrients across cell membrane, some fight infectious                  transport
organisms, some are hormones, some are enzymes,                        into cells
148                                                                            BIOLOGY


              etc. (Table 9.5). Collagen is the most abundant protein in animal world
              and Ribulose bisphosphate Carboxylase-Oxygenase (RuBisCO) is the
              most abundant protein in the whole of the biosphere.


              9.5 POLYSACCHARIDES

              The acid insoluble pellet also has polysaccharides (carbohydrates) as
              another class of macromolecules. Polysaccharides are long chains of
              sugars. They are threads (literally a cotton thread) containing different
              monosaccharides as building blocks. For example, cellulose is a
              polymeric polysaccharide consisting of only one type of monosaccharide
              i.e., glucose. Cellulose is a homopolymer. Starch is a variant of this but
              present as a store house of energy in plant tissues. Animals have another
              variant called glycogen. Inulin is a polymer of fructose. In a
              polysaccharide chain (say glycogen), the right end is called the reducing
              end and the left end is called the non-reducing end. It has branches as
              shown in the form of a cartoon (Figure 9.2). Starch forms helical
              secondary structures. In fact, starch can hold I2 molecules in the helical
              portion. The starch-I2 is blue in colour. Cellulose does not contain
              complex helices and hence cannot hold I2.




                                                             CH2OH          CH2OH
  O                                                O               O              O
                                                              OH             OH
                                                         O              O             OH
  O   O                                                            OH             OH

              CH2
      O


          O            O             O             O

      Figure 9.2 Diagrammatic representation of a portion of glycogen
     BIOMOLECULES                                                                149


    Plant cell walls are made of cellulose. Paper made from plant pulp
and cotton fibre is cellulosic. There are more complex polysaccharides in
nature. They have as building blocks, amino-sugars and chemically
modified sugars (e.g., glucosamine, N-acetyl galactosamine, etc.).
Exoskeletons of arthropods, for example, have a complex polysaccharide
called chitin. These complex polysaccharides are mostly homopolymers.


9.6 NUCLEIC ACIDS

The other type of macromolecule that one would find in the acid insoluble
fraction of any living tissue is the nucleic acid. These are polynucleotides.
Together with polysaccharides and polypeptides these comprise the true
macromolecular fraction of any living tissue or cell. For nucleic acids, the
building block is a nucleotide. A nucleotide has three chemically distinct
components. One is a heterocyclic compound, the second is a
monosaccharide and the third a phosphoric acid or phosphate.
    As you notice in Figure 9.1, the heterocyclic compounds in nucleic
acids are the nitrogenous bases named adenine, guanine, uracil, cytosine,
and thymine. Adenine and Guanine are substituted purines while the
rest are substituted pyrimidines. The skeletal heterocyclic ring is called
as purine and pyrimidine respectively. The sugar found in polynucleotides
is either ribose (a monosaccharide pentose) or 2’ deoxyribose. A nucleic
acid containing deoxyribose is called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) while
that which contains ribose is called ribonucleic acid (RNA).


9.7 STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS

Proteins, as mentioned earlier, are heteropolymers containing strings of
amino acids. Structure of molecules means different things in different
contexts. In inorganic chemistry, the structure invariably refers to the
molecular formulae (e.g., NaCl, MgCl2, etc.). Organic chemists always write
a two dimensional view of the molecules while representing the structure
of the molecules (e.g., benzene, naphthalene, etc.). Physicists conjure up
the three dimensional views of molecular structures while biologists
describe the protein structure at four levels. The sequence of amino acids
i.e., the positional information in a protein – which is the first amino acid,
which is second, and so on – is called the primary structure (Figure 9.3)
of a protein. A protein is imagined as a line, the left end represented by
the first amino acid and the right end represented by the last amino acid.
The first amino acid is also called as N-terminal amino acid. The last
amino acid is called the C-terminal amino acid. A protein thread does not
exist throughout as an extended rigid rod. The thread is folded in the
form of a helix (similar to a revolving staircase). Of course, only some
 150                                                                                         BIOLOGY




Figure 9.3 Primary structure of a portion of a hypothetical protein. N and C refer to
           the two termini of every protein. Single letter codes and three letter
           abbreviations for amino acids are also indicated.

                                                       portions of the protein thread are arranged
                                                       in the form of a helix. In proteins, only right
                                                       handed helices are observed. Other regions
                                                       of the protein thread are folded into other
                                                       forms in what is called the secondary
                                                       structure. In addition, the long protein
                                                       chain is also folded upon itself like a hollow
                                                       woolen ball, giving rise to the tertiary
                                                       structure (Figure 9.4 a, b). This gives us a
                                                       3-dimensional view of a protein. Tertiary
                                                       structure is absolutely necessary for the
                                                       many biological activities of proteins.
                  N                                        Some proteins are an assembly of more
                                                       than one polypeptide or subunits. The
                                                       manner in which these individual folded
                                                       polypeptides or subunits are arranged with
                                         C             respect to each other (e.g. linear string of
          (a)                  (b)
                                                       spheres, spheres arranged one upon each
                                                       other in the form of a cube or plate etc.) is
Figure 9.4 Cartoon showing : (a) A secondary
           structure and (b) A tertiary structure      the architecture of a protein otherwise called
           of proteins                                 the quaternary structure of a protein. Adult
     BIOMOLECULES                                                                                            151


human haemoglobin consists of 4 subunits. Two of these are identical to
each other. Hence, two subunits of α type and two subunits of β type
together constitute the human haemoglobin (Hb).


9.8 NATURE OF BOND LINKING MONOMERS IN A POLYMER

In a polypeptide or a protein, amino acids are linked by a peptide bond
which is formed when the carboxyl (-COOH) group of one amino acid
reacts with the amino (-NH2) group of the next amino acid with the
elimination of a water moiety (the process is called dehydration). In a
polysaccharide the individual monosaccharides are linked by a glycosidic
bond. This bond is also formed by dehydration. This bond is formed
between two carbon atoms of two adjacent monosaccharides. In a nucleic
acid a phosphate moiety links the 3’-carbon of one sugar of one nucleotide
to the 5’-carbon of the sugar of the succeeding nucleotide. The bond
between the phosphate and hydroxyl group of sugar is an ester bond. As
there is one such ester bond on either side, it is called phosphodiester
bond (Figure 9.5).
    Nucleic acids exhibit a wide variety of secondary structures. For
example, one of the secondary structures exhibited by DNA is the famous
Watson-Crick model. This model says that DNA exists as a double helix.
The two strands of polynucleotides are antiparallel i.e., run in the opposite
direction. The backbone is formed by the sugar-phosphate-sugar chain.
The nitrogen bases are projected more or less perpendicular to this
backbone but face inside. A and G of one strand compulsorily base pairs

             5'        3'                                                                               O
                                                     OCH2    O
                                                                 Thymine ....... Adenine    O          CH2




                                                       O                                         O

                                        O   P   OH                                          HO P O

                                                        O                                        O
                                                                         ....... Cytosine
                                                                 Guanine .......
                                                       CH2       O                     O         CH2




                                                            O                                O
            5'    3'

                   Figure 9.5 Diagram indicating secondary structure of DNA
152                                                                          BIOLOGY


      with T and C, respectively, on the other strand. There are two hydrogen
      bonds between A and T and three hydrogen bonds between G and C.
      Each strand appears like a helical staircase. Each step of ascent is
      represented by a pair of bases. At each step of ascent, the strand turns
      36°. One full turn of the helical strand would involve ten steps or ten base
      pairs. Attempt drawing a line diagram. The pitch would be 34Å. The rise
      per base pair would be 3.4Å. This form of DNA with the above mentioned
      salient features is called B-DNA. In higher classes, you will be told that
      there are more than a dozen forms of DNA named after English alphabets
      with unique structural features.


      9.9 DYNAMIC STATE OF BODY CONSTITUENTS – CONCEPT OF
          METABOLISM

      What we have learnt till now is that living organisms, be it a simple bacterial
      cell, a protozoan, a plant or an animal, contain thousands of organic
      compounds. These compounds or biomolecules are present in certain
      concentrations (expressed as mols/cell or mols/litre etc.). One of the greatest
      discoveries ever made was the observation that all these biomolecules have
      a turn over. This means that they are constantly being changed into some
      other biomolecules and also made from some other biomolecules. This
      breaking and making is through chemical reactions constantly occuring
      in living organisms. Together all these chemical reactions are called
      metabolism. Each of the metabolic reactions results in the transformation
      of biomolecules. A few examples for such metabolic transformations are:
      removal of CO2 from amino acids making an amino acid into an amine,
      removal of amino group in a nucleotide base; hydrolysis of a glycosidic
      bond in a disaccharide, etc. We can list tens and thousands of such
      examples. Majority of these metabolic reactions do not occur in isolation
      but are always linked to some other reactions. In other words, metabolites
      are converted into each other in a series of linked reactions called metabolic
      pathways. These metabolic pathways are similar to the automobile traffic
      in a city. These pathways are either linear or circular. These pathways criss-
      cross each other, i.e., there are traffic junctions. Flow of metabolites through
      metabolic pathway has a definite rate and direction like automobile traffic.
      This metabolite flow is called the dynamic state of body constituents. What
      is most important is that this interlinked metabolic traffic is very smooth
      and without a single reported mishap for healthy conditions. Another feature
      of these metabolic reactions is that every chemical reaction is a catalysed
      reaction. There is no uncatalysed metabolic conversion in living systems.
      Even CO2 dissolving in water, a physical process, is a catalysed reaction in
      living systems. The catalysts which hasten the rate of a given metabolic
      conversation are also proteins. These proteins with catalytic power are
      named enzymes.
     BIOMOLECULES                                                               153


9.10 METABOLIC BASIS FOR LIVING

Metabolic pathways can lead to a more complex structure from a simpler
structure (for example, acetic acid becomes cholesterol) or lead to a simpler
structure from a complex structure (for example, glucose becomes lactic
acid in our skeletal muscle). The former cases are called biosynthetic
pathways or anabolic pathways. The latter constitute degradation and
hence are called catabolic pathways. Anabolic pathways, as expected,
consume energy. Assembly of a protein from amino acids requires energy
input. On the other hand, catabolic pathways lead to the release of energy.
For example, when glucose is degraded to lactic acid in our skeletal muscle,
energy is liberated. This metabolic pathway from glucose to lactic acid which
occurs in 10 metabolic steps is called glycolysis. Living organisms have
learnt to trap this energy liberated during degradation and store it in the
form of chemical bonds. As and when needed, this bond energy is utilised
for biosynthetic, osmotic and mechanical work that we perform. The most
important form of energy currency in living systems is the bond energy in
a chemical called adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
    How do living organisms derive their energy? What strategies have they
evolved? How do they store this energy and in what form? How do they
convert this energy into work? You will study and understand all this under
a sub-discipline called ‘Bioenergetics’ later in your higher classes.


9.11    THE LIVING STATE

At this level, you must understand that the tens and thousands of
chemical compounds in a living organism, otherwise called metabolites,
or biomolecules, are present at concentrations characteristic of each of
them. For example, the blood concentration of glucose in a normal healthy
individual is 4.5-5.0 mM, while that of hormones would be nanograms/
mL. The most important fact of biological systems is that all living
organisms exist in a steady-state characterised by concentrations of each
of these biomolecules. These biomolecules are in a metabolic flux. Any
chemical or physical process moves spontaneously to equilibrium. The
steady state is a non-equilibrium state. One should remember from
physics that systems at equilibrium cannot perform work. As living
organisms work continuously, they cannot afford to reach equilibrium.
Hence the living state is a non-equilibrium steady-state to be able
to perform work; living process is a constant effort to prevent falling
into equilibrium. This is achieved by energy input. Metabolism provides
a mechanism for the production of energy. Hence the living state and
metabolism are synonymous. Without metabolism there cannot be a
living state.
154                                                                           BIOLOGY


      9.12 ENZYMES

      Almost all enzymes are proteins. There are some nucleic acids that behave
      like enzymes. These are called ribozymes. One can depict an enzyme by a
      line diagram. An enzyme like any protein has a primary structure, i.e.,
      amino acid sequence of the protein. An enzyme like any protein has the
      secondary and the tertiary structure. When you look at a tertiary structure
      (Figure 9.4 b) you will notice that the backbone of the protein chain folds
      upon itself, the chain criss-crosses itself and hence, many crevices or
      pockets are made. One such pocket is the ‘active site’. An active site of an
      enzyme is a crevice or pocket into which the substrate fits. Thus enzymes,
      through their active site, catalyse reactions at a high rate. Enzyme catalysts
      differ from inorganic catalysts in many ways, but one major difference
      needs mention. Inorganic catalysts work efficiently at high temperatures
      and high pressures, while enzymes get damaged at high temperatures
      (say above 40°C). However, enzymes isolated from organisms who normally
      live under extremely high temperatures (e.g., hot vents and sulphur
      springs), are stable and retain their catalytic power even at high
      temperatures (upto 80°-90°C). Thermal stability is thus an important
      quality of such enzymes isolated from thermophilic organisms.

      9.12.1 Chemical Reactions
      How do we understand these enzymes? Let us first understand a chemical
      reaction. Chemical compounds undergo two types of changes. A physical
      change simply refers to a change in shape without breaking of bonds.
      This is a physical process. Another physical process is a change in state
      of matter: when ice melts into water, or when water becomes a vapour.
      These are also physical processes. However, when bonds are broken and
      new bonds are formed during transformation, this will be called a chemical
      reaction. For example:

                             Ba(OH)2 + H2SO4 → BaSO4 + 2H2O

      is an inorganic chemical reaction. Similarly, hydrolysis of starch into
      glucose is an organic chemical reaction. Rate of a physical or chemical
      process refers to the amount of product formed per unit time. It can be
      expressed as:
                                                 δP
                                        rate =
                                                 δt
      Rate can also be called velocity if the direction is specified. Rates of physical
      and chemical processes are influenced by temperature among other
      factors. A general rule of thumb is that rate doubles or decreases by half
     BIOMOLECULES                                                                155


for every 10°C change in either direction. Catalysed reactions proceed at
rates vastly higher than that of uncatalysed ones. When enzyme catalysed
reactions are observed, the rate would be vastly higher than the same but
uncatalysed reaction. For example

                                       Carbonic anhydrase
        CO2          +        H2O                            H2CO3
  carbon dioxide             water                          carbonic acid

    In the absence of any enzyme this reaction is very slow, with about
200 molecules of H2CO3 being formed in an hour. However, by using the
enzyme present within the cytoplasm called carbonic anhydrase, the
reaction speeds dramatically with about 600,000 molecules being formed
every second. The enzyme has accelerated the reaction rate by about 10
million times. The power of enzymes is incredible indeed!
    There are thousands of types of enzymes each catalysing a unique
chemical or metabolic reaction. A multistep chemical reaction, when each
of the steps is catalysed by the same enzyme complex or different enzymes,
is called a metabolic pathway. For example,

                         Glucose → 2 Pyruvic acid
                    C6H12O6 + O2 → 2C3H4 O3 + 2H2O

is actually a metabolic pathway in which glucose becomes pyruvic acid
through ten different enzyme catalysed metabolic reactions. When you
study respiration in Chapter 14 you will study these reactions. At this
stage you should know that this very metabolic pathway with one or two
additional reactions gives rise to a variety of metabolic end products. In
our skeletal muscle, under anaerobic conditions, lactic acid is formed.
Under normal aerobic conditions, pyruvic acid is formed. In yeast, during
fermentation, the same pathway leads to the production of ethanol
(alcohol). Hence, in different conditions different products are possible.


9.12.2 How do Enzymes bring about such High Rates of
       Chemical Conversions?
To understand this we should study enzymes a little more. We have already
understood the idea of an ‘active site’. The chemical or metabolic conversion
refers to a reaction. The chemical which is converted into a product is
called a ‘substrate’. Hence enzymes, i.e. proteins with three dimensional
structures including an ‘active site’, convert a substrate (S) into a product
(P). Symbolically, this can be depicted as:
                                     S →P
     It is now understood that the substrate ‘S’ has to bind the enzyme at
its ‘active site’ within a given cleft or pocket. The substrate has to diffuse
         156                                                                                                BIOLOGY


                        Transition state                        towards the ‘active site’. There is thus, an
                                                                obligatory formation of an ‘ES’ complex. E
                                    Activation energy           stands for enzyme. This complex formation is
                                     without enzyme             a transient phenomenon. During the state
                                                                where substrate is bound to the enzyme active
Potential Energy




                                                                site, a new structure of the substrate called
                                            Activation
                                      energy with enzyme        transition state structure is formed. Very soon,
                                                                after the expected bond breaking/making is
               Substrate (s)
                                                                completed, the product is released from the
                                                                active site. In other words, the structure of
                                                                substrate gets transformed into the structure
                                                                of product(s). The pathway of this
                                                                transformation must go through the so-called
                                                   Product (P) transition state structure. There could be
                        Progress of reaction                    many more ‘altered structural states’ between
                                                                the stable substrate and the product. Implicit
             Figure 9.6 Concept of activation energy
                                                                in this statement is the fact that all other
                                  intermediate structural states are unstable. Stability is something related
                                  to energy status of the molecule or the structure. Hence, when we look at
                                  this pictorially through a graph it looks like something as in Figure 9.6.
                                      The y-axis represents the potential energy content. The x-axis
                                  represents the progression of the structural transformation or states
                                  through the ‘transition state’. You would notice two things. The energy
                                  level difference between S and P. If ‘P’ is at a lower level than ‘S’, the reaction
                                  is an exothermic reaction. One need not supply energy (by heating) in
                                  order to form the product. However, whether it is an exothermic or
                                  spontaneous reaction or an endothermic or energy requiring reaction,
                                  the ‘S’ has to go through a much higher energy state or transition state.
                                  The difference in average energy content of ‘S’ from that of this transition
                                  state is called ‘activation energy’.
                                      Enzymes eventually bring down this energy barrier making the
                                  transition of ‘S’ to ‘P’ more easy.

                                    9.12.3 Nature of Enzyme Action
                                    Each enzyme (E) has a substrate (S) binding site in its molecule so that a
                                    highly reactive enzyme-substrate complex (ES) is produced. This
                                    complex is short-lived and dissociates into its product(s) P and the
                                    unchanged enzyme with an intermediate formation of the enzyme-product
                                    complex (EP).
                                       The formation of the ES complex is essential for catalysis.

                                                     E + S ↽ ES → EP → E + P
                                                           ⇀
                   BIOMOLECULES                                                                                             157


 The catalytic cycle of an enzyme action can be described in the following
 steps:
                  1. First, the substrate binds to the active site of the enzyme, fitting
                     into the active site.
                  2. The binding of the substrate induces the enzyme to alter its shape,
                     fitting more tightly around the substrate.
                  3. The active site of the enzyme, now in close proximity of the
                     substrate breaks the chemical bonds of the substrate and the
                     new enzyme- product complex is formed.
                  4. The enzyme releases the products of the reaction and the free
                     enzyme is ready to bind to another molecule of the substrate and
                     run through the catalytic cycle once again.

 9.12.4 Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity
 The activity of an enzyme can be affected by a change in the conditions
 which can alter the tertiary structure of the protein. These include
 temperature, pH, change in substrate concentration or binding of specific
 chemicals that regulate its activity.
 Temperature and pH
 Enzymes generally function in a narrow range of temperature and pH
 (Figure 9.7). Each enzyme shows its highest activity at a particular
 temperature and pH called the optimum temperature and optimum pH.
 Activity declines both below and above the optimum value. Low
 temperature preserves the enzyme in a temporarily inactive state whereas
 high temperature destroys enzymatic activity because proteins are
 denatured by heat.


                                                                               Vmax
                                       (a)                         (b)                                     (c)
                                                                                Velocity of reaction (V)
Enzyme activity




                                                                         Vmax
                                                                           2




                            pH                       Temperature                                                 Km   [S]
                     Figure 9.7 Effect of change in : (a) pH (b) Temperature and (c) Concentration of
                                substrate on enzyme activity
158                                                                      BIOLOGY


      Concentration of Substrate
      With the increase in substrate concentration, the velocity of the enzymatic
      reaction rises at first. The reaction ultimately reaches a maximum velocity
      (Vmax) which is not exceeded by any further rise in concentration of the
      substrate. This is because the enzyme molecules are fewer than the
      substrate molecules and after saturation of these molecules, there are no
      free enzyme molecules to bind with the additional substrate molecules
      (Figure 9.7).
          The activity of an enzyme is also sensitive to the presence of specific
      chemicals that bind to the enzyme. When the binding of the chemical
      shuts off enzyme activity, the process is called inhibition and the chemical
      is called an inhibitor.
          When the inhibitor closely resembles the substrate in its molecular
      structure and inhibits the activity of the enzyme, it is known as
      competitive inhibitor. Due to its close structural similarity with the
      substrate, the inhibitor competes with the substrate for the substrate-
      binding site of the enzyme. Consequently, the substrate cannot bind and
      as a result, the enzyme action declines, e.g., inhibition of succinic
      dehydrogenase by malonate which closely resembles the substrate
      succinate in structure. Such competitive inhibitors are often used in the
      control of bacterial pathogens.


      9.12.5 Classification and Nomenclature of Enzymes
      Thousands of enzymes have been discovered, isolated and studied. Most
      of these enzymes have been classified into different groups based on the
      type of reactions they catalyse. Enzymes are divided into 6 classes each
      with 4-13 subclasses and named accordingly by a four-digit number.
      Oxidoreductases/dehydrogenases: Enzymes which catalyse
      oxidoreduction between two substrates S and S’ e.g.,

              S reduced + S’ oxidised → S oxidised + S’ reduced.
      Transferases: Enzymes catalysing a transfer of a group, G (other than
      hydrogen) between a pair of substrate S and S’ e.g.,

                               S - G + S’ → S + S’ - G
      Hydrolases: Enzymes catalysing hydrolysis of ester, ether, peptide,
      glycosidic, C-C, C-halide or P-N bonds.
      Lyases: Enzymes that catalyse removal of groups from substrates by
      mechanisms other than hydrolysis leaving double bonds.
     BIOMOLECULES                                                                          159


Isomerases: Includes all enzymes catalysing inter-conversion of optical,
geometric or positional isomers.
Ligases: Enzymes catalysing the linking together of 2 compounds, e.g.,
enzymes which catalyse joining of C-O, C-S, C-N, P-O etc. bonds.

9.12.6 Co-factors
Enzymes are composed of one or several polypeptide chains. However,
there are a number of cases in which non-protein constituents called co-
factors are bound to the the enzyme to make the enzyme catalytically
active. In these instances, the protein portion of the enzymes is called the
apoenzyme. Three kinds of cofactors may be identified: prosthetic groups,
co-enzymes and metal ions.
    Prosthetic groups are organic compounds and are distinguished from
other cofactors in that they are tightly bound to the apoenzyme. For
example, in peroxidase and catalase, which catalyze the breakdown of
hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen, haem is the prosthetic group
and it is a part of the active site of the enzyme.
    Co-enzymes are also organic compounds but their association with
the apoenzyme is only transient, usually occurring during the course of
catalysis. Furthermore, co-enzymes serve as co-factors in a number of
different enzyme catalyzed reactions. The essential chemical components
of many coenzymes are vitamins, e.g., coenzyme nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) and NADP contain the vitamin niacin.
    A number of enzymes require metal ions for their activity which form
coordination bonds with side chains at the active site and at the same
time form one or more cordination bonds with the substrate, e.g., zinc is
a cofactor for the proteolytic enzyme carboxypeptidase.
    Catalytic activity is lost when the co-factor is removed from the enzyme
which testifies that they play a crucial role in the catalytic activity of the
enzyme.



                                               SUMMARY

       Although there is a bewildering diversity of living organisms, their chemical
       composition and metabolic reactions appear to be remarkably similar. The
       elemental composition of living tissues and non-living matter appear also to be
       similar when analysed qualitatively. However, a closer examination reveals that
       the relative abundance of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen is higher in living systems
       when compared to inanimate matter. The most abundant chemical in living
       organisms is water. There are thousands of small molecular weight (<1000 Da)
160                                                                                        BIOLOGY


      biomolecules. Amino acids, monosaccharide and disaccharide sugars, fatty acids,
      glycerol, nucleotides, nucleosides and nitrogen bases are some of the organic
      compounds seen in living organisms. There are 20 types of amino acids and 5
      types of nucleotides. Fats and oils are glycerides in which fatty acids are esterified
      to glycerol. Phospholipids contain, in addition, a phosphorylated nitrogenous
      compound.
          Only three types of macromolecules, i.e., proteins, nucleic acids and
      polysaccharides are found in living systems. Lipids, because of their association
      with membranes separate in the macromolecular fraction. Biomacromolecules
      are polymers. They are made of building blocks which are different. Proteins
      are heteropolymers made of amino acids. Nucleic acids (RNA and DNA) are
      composed of nucleotides. Biomacromolecules have a hierarchy of structures –
      primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary. Nucleic acids serve as genetic
      material. Polysaccharides are components of cell wall in plants, fungi and also
      of the exoskeleton of arthropods. They also are storage forms of energy (e.g.,
      starch and glycogen). Proteins serve a variety of cellular functions. Many of
      them are enzymes, some are antibodies, some are receptors, some are hormones
      and some others are structural proteins. Collagen is the most abundant protein
      in animal world and Ribulose bisphosphate Carboxylase-Oxygenase (RuBisCO)
      is the most abundant protein in the whole of the biosphere.
          Enzymes are proteins which catalyse biochemical reactions in the cells.
      Ribozymes are nucleic acids with catalytic power. Proteinaceous enzymes
      exhibit substrate specificity, require optimum temperature and pH for maximal
      activity. They are denatured at high temperatures. Enzymes lower activation
      energy of reactions and enhance greatly the rate of the reactions. Nucleic acids
      carry hereditary information and are passed on from parental generation to
      progeny.



                                          EXERCISES


       1. What are macromolecules? Give examples.
       2. Illustrate a glycosidic, peptide and a phospho-diester bond.
       3. What is meant by tertiary structure of proteins?
       4. Find and write down structures of 10 interesting small molecular weight
          biomolecules. Find if there is any industry which manufactures the compounds
          by isolation. Find out who are the buyers.
       5. Proteins have primary structure. If you are given a method to know which amino
          acid is at either of the two termini (ends) of a protein, can you connect this
          information to purity or homogeneity of a protein?
       6. Find out and make a list of proteins used as therapeutic agents. Find other
          applications of proteins (e.g., Cosmetics etc.)
       7. Explain the composition of triglyceride.
BIOMOLECULES                                                                             161


  8. Can you describe what happens when milk is converted into curd or yoghurt,
     from your understanding of proteins.
  9. Can you attempt building models of biomolecules using commercially available
     atomic models (Ball and Stick models).
 10. Attempt titrating an amino acid against a weak base and discover the number
     of dissociating ( ionizable ) functional groups in the amino acid.
 11. Draw the structure of the amino acid, alanine.
 12. What are gums made of? Is Fevicol different?
 13. Find out a qualitative test for proteins, fats and oils, amino acids and test any
     fruit juice, saliva, sweat and urine for them.
 14. Find out how much cellulose is made by all the plants in the biosphere and
     compare it with how much of paper is manufactured by man and hence what is
     the consumption of plant material by man annually. What a loss of vegetation!
 15. Describe the important properties of enzymes.
 226                                                                                       BIOLOGY




                           CHAPTER 14
                           RESPIRATION                 IN    PLANTS
14.1 Do Plants         All of us breathe to live, but why is breathing so essential to life? What
     Breathe?          happens when we breathe? Also, do all living organisms, including plants
14.2 Glycolysis        and microbes, breathe? If so, how?
                            All living organisms need energy for carrying out daily life activities,
14.3 Fermentation      be it absorption, transport, movement, reproduction or even breathing.
14.4 Aerobic           Where does all this energy come from? We know we eat food for energy –
     Respiration       but how is this energy taken from food? How is this energy utilised? Do
                       all foods give the same amount of energy? Do plants ‘eat’? Where do plants
14.5 The Respiratory
                       get their energy from? And micro-organisms – for their energy
     Balance Sheet
                       requirements, do they eat ‘food’?
14.6 Amphibolic             You may wonder at the several questions raised above – they may
     Pathway           seem to be very disconnected. But in reality, the process of breathing is
                       very much connected to the process of release of energy from food. Let us
14.7 Respiratory
                       try and understand how this happens.
     Quotient
                            All the energy required for ‘life’ processes is obtained by oxidation of
                       some macromolecules that we call ‘food’. Only green plants and
                       cyanobacteria can prepare their own food; by the process of photosynthesis
                       they trap light energy and convert it into chemical energy that is stored in
                       the bonds of carbohydrates like glucose, sucrose and starch. We must
                       remember that in green plants too, not all cells, tissues and organs
                       photosynthesise; only cells containing chloroplasts, that are most often
                       located in the superficial layers, carry out photosynthesis. Hence, even
                       in green plants all other organs, tissues and cells that are non-green,
                       need food for oxidation. Hence, food has to be translocated to all non-
                       green parts. Animals are heterotrophic, i.e., they obtain food from plants




                                                                                           2017-18
     RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                       227


directly (herbivores) or indirectly (carnivores). Saprophytes like fungi are
dependent on dead and decaying matter. What is important to recognise
is that ultimately all the food that is respired for life processes comes from
photosynthesis. This chapter deals with cellular respiration or the
mechanism of breakdown of food materials within the cell to release
energy, and the trapping of this energy for synthesis of ATP.
     Photosynthesis, of course, takes place within the chloroplasts (in the
eukaryotes), whereas the breakdown of complex molecules to yield energy
takes place in the cytoplasm and in the mitochondria (also only in
eukaryotes). The breaking of the C-C bonds of complex compounds
through oxidation within the cells, leading to release of considerable
amount of energy is called respiration. The compounds that are oxidised
during this process are known as respiratory substrates. Usually
carbohydrates are oxidised to release energy, but proteins, fats and even
organic acids can be used as respiratory substances in some plants, under
certain conditions. During oxidation within a cell, all the energy contained
in respiratory substrates is not released free into the cell, or in a single
step. It is released in a series of slow step-wise reactions controlled by
enzymes, and it is trapped as chemical energy in the form of ATP. Hence,
it is important to understand that the energy released by oxidation in
respiration is not (or rather cannot be) used directly but is used to
synthesise ATP, which is broken down whenever (and wherever) energy
needs to be utilised. Hence, ATP acts as the energy currency of the cell.
This energy trapped in ATP is utilised in various energy-requiring
processes of the organisms, and the carbon skeleton produced during
respiration is used as precursors for biosynthesis of other molecules in
the cell.


14.1 DO PLANTS BREATHE?

Well, the answer to this question is not quite so direct. Yes, plants require
O2 for respiration to occur and they also give out CO2. Hence, plants have
systems in place that ensure the availability of O2. Plants, unlike animals,
have no specialised organs for gaseous exchange but they have stomata
and lenticels for this purpose. There are several reasons why plants can
get along without respiratory organs. First, each plant part takes care of
its own gas-exchange needs. There is very little transport of gases from
one plant part to another. Second, plants do not present great demands
for gas exchange. Roots, stems and leaves respire at rates far lower than
animals do. Only during photosynthesis are large volumes of gases
exchanged and, each leaf is well adapted to take care of its own needs
during these periods. When cells photosynthesise, availability of O2 is not
a problem in these cells since O2 is released within the cell. Third, the




                                                                                 2017-18
228                                                                            BIOLOGY


      distance that gases must diffuse even in large, bulky plants is not great.
      Each living cell in a plant is located quite close to the surface of the plant.
      ‘This is true for leaves’, you may ask, ‘but what about thick, woody stems
      and roots?’ In stems, the ‘living’ cells are organised in thin layers inside
      and beneath the bark. They also have openings called lenticels. The cells
      in the interior are dead and provide only mechanical support. Thus, most
      cells of a plant have at least a part of their surface in contact with air. This
      is also facilitated by the loose packing of parenchyma cells in leaves, stems
      and roots, which provide an interconnected network of air spaces.
           The complete combustion of glucose, which produces CO2 and H2O
      as end products, yields energy most of which is given out as heat.
                     C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O + Energy
          If this energy is to be useful to the cell, it should be able to utilise it to
      synthesise other molecules that the cell requires. The strategy that the
      plant cell uses is to catabolise the glucose molecule in such a way that
      not all the liberated energy goes out as heat. The key is to oxidise glucose
      not in one step but in several small steps enabling some steps to be just
      large enough such that the energy released can be coupled to ATP
      synthesis. How this is done is, essentially, the story of respiration.
          During the process of respiration, oxygen is utilised, and carbon
      dioxide, water and energy are released as products. The combustion
      reaction requires oxygen. But some cells live where oxygen may or may
      not be available. Can you think of such situations (and organisms) where
      O2 is not available? There are sufficient reasons to believe that the first
      cells on this planet lived in an atmosphere that lacked oxygen. Even
      among present-day living organisms, we know of several that are adapted
      to anaerobic conditions. Some of these organisms are facultative
      anaerobes, while in others the requirement for anaerobic condition is
      obligate. In any case, all living organisms retain the enzymatic machinery
      to partially oxidise glucose without the help of oxygen. This breakdown
      of glucose to pyruvic acid is called glycolysis.


      14.2 GLYCOLYSIS

      The term glycolysis has originated from the Greek words, glycos for sugar,
      and lysis for splitting. The scheme of glycolysis was given by Gustav
      Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and J. Parnas, and is often referred to as the
      EMP pathway. In anaerobic organisms, it is the only process in respiration.
      Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell and is present in all living
      organisms. In this process, glucose undergoes partial oxidation to form
      two molecules of pyruvic acid. In plants, this glucose is derived from
      sucrose, which is the end product of photosynthesis, or from storage




                                                                              2017-18
     RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                                         229


carbohydrates. Sucrose is converted into glucose
and fructose by the enzyme, invertase, and these
two monosaccharides readily enter the glycolytic
pathway. Glucose and fructose are
                                                             Glucose
phosphorylated to give rise to glucose-6-                      (6C)
                                                       ATP
phosphate by the activity of the enzyme
                                                       ADP
hexokinase. This phosphorylated form of glucose       Glucose-6-phosphate
                                                              (6C)
then isomerises to produce fructose-6-
phosphate. Subsequent steps of metabolism of
                                                      Fructose-6-phosphate
glucose and fructose are same. The various steps       ATP
                                                               (6C)
of glycolysis are depicted in Figure 14.1. In          ADP
glycolysis, a chain of ten reactions, under the      Fructose1, 6-bisphosphate
                                                                (6C)
control of different enzymes, takes place to
produce pyruvate from glucose. While studying                                          Triose phosphate
                                                          Triose phosphate
the steps of glycolysis, please note the steps at   (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate)      (Dihydroxy acetone
                                                                 (3C)                     phosphate)
which utilisation or synthesis of ATP or (in this                     NAD+                    (3C)
case) NADH + H+ take place.                                            NADH+H +
    ATP is utilised at two steps: first in the         2 × Triose bisphosphate
conversion of glucose into glucose 6-phosphate      (1,3 bisphosphoglyceric acid)
                                                                 (3C)
and second in the conversion of fructose                ADP
6-phosphate to fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate.            ATP
    The fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate is split            2 × Triose phosphate
into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and                  (3-phosphoglyceric acid)
                                                                (3C)
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL). We find
that there is one step where NADH + H+ is
formed from NAD + ; this is when                     2 × 2-phosphoglycerate
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) is converted
to 1, 3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPGA). Two               H2O
redox-equivalents are removed (in the form of
                                                     2 × phosphoenolpyruvate
two hydrogen atoms) from PGAL and transferred
                                                       ADP
to a molecule of NAD+. PGAL is oxidised and            ATP
with inorganic phosphate to get converted into
                                                        2 × Pyruvic acid
BPGA. The conversion of BPGA to                               (3C)
3-phosphoglyceric acid (PGA), is also an energy
yielding process; this energy is trapped by the
                                                            Figure 14.1      Steps of glycolysis
formation of ATP. Another ATP is synthesised
during the conversion of PEP to pyruvic acid.
Can you then calculate how many ATP
molecules are directly synthesised in this
pathway from one glucose molecule?
    Pyruvic acid is then the key product of
glycolysis. What is the metabolic fate of
pyruvate? This depends on the cellular need.




                                                                                                    2017-18
230                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      There are three major ways in which different cells handle pyruvic acid
                      produced by glycolysis. These are lactic acid fermentation, alcoholic
                      fermentation and aerobic respiration. Fermentation takes place under
                      anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes.
                      For the complete oxidation of glucose to CO2 and H2O, however, organisms
                      adopt Krebs’ cycle which is also called as aerobic respiration. This requires
                      O2 supply.

                      14.3 FERMENTATION

                     In fermentation, say by yeast, the incomplete oxidation of glucose is
                     achieved under anaerobic conditions by sets of reactions where pyruvic
                     acid is converted to CO2 and ethanol. The enzymes, pyruvic acid
                     decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase catalyse these reactions. Other
                     organisms like some bacteria produce lactic acid from pyruvic acid. The
                     steps involved are shown in Figure 14.2. In animal cells also, like muscles
                     during exercise, when oxygen is inadequate for cellular respiration pyruvic
                     acid is reduced to lactic acid by lactate dehydrogenase. The reducing
                     agent is NADH+H+ which is reoxidised to NAD+ in both the processes.
                                                    In both lactic acid and alcohol
                                                fermentation not much energy is released; less
                                                than seven per cent of the energy in glucose
                                                is released and not all of it is trapped as high
                                                energy bonds of ATP. Also, the processes are
                                                hazardous – either acid or alcohol is
                                                produced. What is the net ATPs that is
                                                synthesised (calculate how many ATP are
                                                synthesised and deduct the number of ATP
                                                utilised during glycolysis) when one molecule
                                                of glucose is fermented to alcohol or lactic
                                                acid? Yeasts poison themselves to death when
                                                the concentration of alcohol reaches about 13
                                                per cent. What then would be the maximum
                                                concentration of alcohol in beverages that
                                                are naturally fermented? How do you think
                                                alcoholic beverages of alcohol content greater
                                                than this concentration are obtained?
                                                    What then is the process by which
Figure 14.2 Major pathways of anaerobic         organisms can carry out complete oxidation
            respiration                         of glucose and extract the energy stored to
                                                synthesise a larger number of ATP molecules




                                                                                         2017-18
     RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                           231


needed for cellular metabolism? In eukaryotes these steps take place
within the mitochondria and this requires O2. Aerobic respiration is the
process that leads to a complete oxidation of organic substances in the
presence of oxygen, and releases CO2, water and a large amount of energy
present in the substrate. This type of respiration is most common in higher
organisms. We will look at these processes in the next section.


14.4 AEROBIC RESPIRATION

For aerobic respiration to take place within the mitochondria, the final
product of glycolysis, pyruvate is transported from the cytoplasm into
the mitochondria. The crucial events in aerobic respiration are:
  • The complete oxidation of pyruvate by the stepwise removal of all
      the hydrogen atoms, leaving three molecules of CO2.
  • The passing on of the electrons removed as part of the hydrogen
      atoms to molecular O2 with simultaneous synthesis of ATP.
   What is interesting to note is that the first process takes place in the
matrix of the mitochondria while the second process is located on the
inner membrane of the mitochondria.
   Pyruvate, which is formed by the glycolytic catabolism of
carbohydrates in the cytosol, after it enters mitochondrial matrix
undergoes oxidative decarboxylation by a complex set of reactions
catalysed by pyruvic dehydrogenase. The reactions catalysed by pyruvic
dehydrogenase require the participation of several coenzymes, including
NAD+ and Coenzyme A.
                                      Mg2+
  Pyruvic acid + CoA + NAD+ 
                             Pyruvate dehydrogenase
                                                    → Acetyl CoA + CO2 + NADH + H+
                                                    

    During this process, two molecules of NADH are produced from the
metabolism of two molecules of pyruvic acid (produced from one glucose
molecule during glycolysis).
    The acetyl CoA then enters a cyclic pathway, tricarboxylic acid cycle,
more commonly called as Krebs’ cycle after the scientist Hans Krebs who
first elucidated it.

14.4.1 Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle
The TCA cycle starts with the condensation of acetyl group with oxaloacetic
acid (OAA) and water to yield citric acid (Figure 14.3). The reaction is
catalysed by the enzyme citrate synthase and a molecule of CoA is released.
Citrate is then isomerised to isocitrate. It is followed by two successive
steps of decarboxylation, leading to the formation of α-ketoglutaric acid




                                                                                     2017-18
 232                                                                                                   BIOLOGY


                           Pyruvate                             and then succinyl-CoA. In the remaining steps
                             (3C)
                     CoA              NAD+                      of citric acid cycle, succinyl-CoA is oxidised
                                   NADH+H+                      to OAA allowing the cycle to continue. During
                                   CO2                          the conversion of succinyl-CoA to succinic
                     Acetyl coenzyme A
                             (2C)                               acid a molecule of GTP is synthesised. This is
                                                                a substrate level phosphorylation. In a
             Oxaloacetic acid                                   coupled reaction GTP is converted to GDP with
                   (4C)               Citric acid
     +
NADH+H                                   (6C) CO2               the simultaneous synthesis of ATP from ADP.
                                                NAD+
   NAD   +                                                      Also there are three points in the cycle where
                                                  NADH+H+
                                    α-ketoglutaric acid         NAD+ is reduced to NADH + H+ and one point
    Malic acid                             (5C)                 where FAD + is reduced to FADH 2 . The
      (4C)            CITRIC ACID CYCLE
                                               CO2              continued oxidation of acetyl CoA via the TCA
                                              NAD+              cycle requires the continued replenishment of
  FADH2
                                                      NADH+H+   oxaloacetic acid, the first member of the cycle.
     FAD+               Succinic acid           GDP
                            (4C)
                                                GTP
                                                                In addition it also requires regeneration of
                                                                NAD+ and FAD+ from NADH and FADH2
                                                                respectively. The summary equation for this
     Figure 14.3            The Citric acid cycle               phase of respiration may be written as follows:



                                                Mitochondrial
Pyruvic acid + 4NAD+ + FAD+ + 2H2 O + ADP + Pi            Matrix → 3CO + 4 NADH + 4 H+
                                                                  2

                                                                            + FADH2 + ATP

                                    We have till now seen that glucose has been broken down to release
                                CO2 and eight molecules of NADH + H+; two of FADH2 have been
                                synthesised besides just two molecules of ATP in TCA cycle. You may be
                                wondering why we have been discussing respiration at all – neither O2
                                has come into the picture nor the promised large number of ATP has yet
                                been synthesised. Also what is the role of the NADH + H+ and FADH2 that
                                is synthesised? Let us now understand the role of O2 in respiration and
                                how ATP is synthesised.

                                14.4.2 Electron Transport System (ETS) and Oxidative
                                       Phosphorylation
                                The following steps in the respiratory process are to release and utilise
                                the energy stored in NADH+H+ and FADH2. This is accomplished when
                                they are oxidised through the electron transport system and the electrons
                                are passed on to O2 resulting in the formation of H2O. The metabolic
                                pathway through which the electron passes from one carrier to another,
                                is called the electron transport system (ETS) (Figure 14.4) and it is
                                present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons from NADH




                                                                                                       2017-18
    RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                                   233


produced in the mitochondrial matrix during
citric acid cycle are oxidised by an NADH
dehydrogenase (complex I), and electrons are
then transferred to ubiquinone located
within the inner membrane. Ubiquinone also
receives reducing equivalents via FADH2
(complex II) that is generated during
oxidation of succinate in the citric acid cycle.
The reduced ubiquinone (ubiquinol) is then
oxidised with the transfer of electrons to
cytochrome c via cytochrome bc1 complex
(complex III). Cytochrome c is a small protein
attached to the outer surface of the inner
                                                                     UQH2
membrane and acts as a mobile carrier for
                                                                                UQ
transfer of electrons between complex III and
IV. Complex IV refers to cytochrome c oxidase
complex containing cytochromes a and a3,
and two copper centres.
    When the electrons pass from one carrier
to another via complex I to IV in the electron
transport chain, they are coupled to ATP
synthase (complex V) for the production of                           UQH2
ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. The                                       UQ
number of ATP molecules synthesised
depends on the nature of the electron donor.
                                                                    Cyt C1
Oxidation of one molecule of NADH gives rise
to 3 molecules of ATP, while that of one
molecule of FADH2 produces 2 molecules of                           Cyt C Cyt a-a
                                                                                   3
ATP. Although the aerobic process of
respiration takes place only in the presence
of oxygen, the role of oxygen is limited to the
terminal stage of the process. Yet, the               Figure 14.4 Electron Transport System (ETS)
presence of oxygen is vital, since it drives the
whole process by removing hydrogen from the system. Oxygen acts as
the final hydrogen acceptor. Unlike photophosphorylation where it is the
light energy that is utilised for the production of proton gradient required
for phosphorylation, in respiration it is the energy of oxidation-reduction
utilised for the same process. It is for this reason that the process is called
oxidative phosphorylation.
    You have already studied about the mechanism of membrane-linked
ATP synthesis as explained by chemiosmotic hypothesis in the earlier
chapter. As mentioned earlier, the energy released during the electron




                                                                                             2017-18
 234                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                                                transport system is utilised in synthesising ATP
                                                with the help of ATP synthase (complex V). This
                                                complex consists of two major components, F1
                                                and F0 (Figure 14.5). The F1 headpiece is a
                                                peripheral membrane protein complex and
                                                contains the site for synthesis of ATP from ADP
                                                and inorganic phosphate. F0 is an integral
                                                membrane protein complex that forms the
                                                channel through which protons cross the inner
                                                membrane. The passage of protons through the
                                                channel is coupled to the catalytic site of the F1
                                                component for the production of ATP. For each
                                                ATP produced, 2H+ passes through F0 from the
                                                intermembrane space to the matrix down the
Figure 14.5 Diagramatic presentation of ATP
                                                electrochemical proton gradient.
            synthesis in mitochondria


                     14.5 THE RESPIRATORY BALANCE SHEET

                     It is possible to make calculations of the net gain of ATP for every glucose
                     molecule oxidised; but in reality this can remain only a theoretical exercise.
                     These calculations can be made only on certain assumptions that:
                       •   There is a sequential, orderly pathway functioning, with one
                           substrate forming the next and with glycolysis, TCA cycle and ETS
                           pathway following one after another.
                       •   The NADH synthesised in glycolysis is transferred into the
                           mitochondria and undergoes oxidative phosphorylation.
                       •   None of the intermediates in the pathway are utilised to synthesise
                           any other compound.
                       •   Only glucose is being respired – no other alternative substrates are
                           entering in the pathway at any of the intermediary stages.
                        But this kind of assumptions are not really valid in a living system; all
                     pathways work simultaneously and do not take place one after another;
                     substrates enter the pathways and are withdrawn from it as and when
                     necessary; ATP is utilised as and when needed; enzymatic rates are
                     controlled by multiple means. Yet, it is useful to do this exercise to
                     appreciate the beauty and efficiency of the living system in extraction
                     and storing energy. Hence, there can be a net gain of 38 ATP molecules
                     during aerobic respiration of one molecule of glucose.




                                                                                          2017-18
    RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                        235


   Now let us compare fermentation and aerobic respiration:
   •   Fermentation accounts for only a partial breakdown of glucose
       whereas in aerobic respiration it is completely degraded to CO2 and
       H2O.
   •   In fermentation there is a net gain of only two molecules of ATP for
       each molecule of glucose degraded to pyruvic acid whereas many
       more molecules of ATP are generated under aerobic conditions.
   •   NADH is oxidised to NAD+ rather slowly in fermentation, however
       the reaction is very vigorous in case of aerobic respiration.

14.6 AMPHIBOLIC PATHWAY
Glucose is the favoured substrate for respiration. All carbohydrates are
usually first converted into glucose before they are used for respiration.
Other substrates can also be respired, as has been mentioned earlier, but
then they do not enter the respiratory pathway at the first step. See Figure
14.6 to see the points of entry of different substrates in the respiratory
pathway. Fats would need to be broken down into glycerol and fatty acids
first. If fatty acids were to be respired they would first be degraded to
acetyl CoA and enter the pathway. Glycerol would enter the pathway
after being converted to PGAL. The proteins would be degraded by
proteases and the individual amino acids (after deamination) depending
on their structure would enter the pathway at some stage within the Krebs’
cycle or even as pyruvate or acetyl CoA.
    Since respiration involves breakdown of substrates, the respiratory
process has traditionally been considered a catabolic process and the
respiratory pathway as a catabolic pathway. But is this understanding
correct? We have discussed above, at which points in the respiratory
pathway different substrates would enter if they were to be respired and
used to derive energy. What is important to recognise is that it is these very
compounds that would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for the
synthesis of the said substrates. Hence, fatty acids would be broken down
to acetyl CoA before entering the respiratory pathway when it is used as a
substrate. But when the organism needs to synthesise fatty acids, acetyl
CoA would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for it. Hence, the
respiratory pathway comes into the picture both during breakdown and
synthesis of fatty acids. Similarly, during breakdown and synthesis of
protein too, respiratory intermediates form the link. Breaking down
processes within the living organism is catabolism, and synthesis is
anabolism. Because the respiratory pathway is involved in both anabolism
and catabolism, it would hence be better to consider the respiratory pathway
as an amphibolic pathway rather than as a catabolic one.




                                                                                 2017-18
236                                                                               BIOLOGY




  Figure 14.6 Interrelationship among metabolic pathways showing respiration
              mediated breakdown of different organic molecules to CO2 and H20


                 14.7 RESPIRATORY QUOTIENT

                 Let us now look at another aspect of respiration. As you know, during
                 aerobic respiration, O2 is consumed and CO2 is released. The ratio of the
                 volume of CO2 evolved to the volume of O2 consumed in respiration is
                 called the respiratory quotient (RQ) or respiratory ratio.

                                              volume of CO2 evolved
                                      RQ =
                                             volume of O2 consumed

                    The respiratory quotient depends upon the type of respiratory
                 substrate used during respiration.
                    When carbohydrates are used as substrate and are completely
                 oxidised, the RQ will be 1, because equal amounts of CO2 and O2 are
                 evolved and consumed, respectively, as shown in the equation below :




                                                                                 2017-18
    RESPIRATION IN PLANTS                                                                        237



              C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O + Energy
                                     6CO2
                              RQ =        = 1.0
                                      6O2

    When fats are used in respiration, the RQ is less than 1. Calculations
for a fatty acid, tripalmitin, if used as a substrate is shown:

          2(C51H98 O6 ) +145O2 →102CO2 + 98H2O + energy
                Tripalmitin
                                   102CO2
                            RQ =          = 0.7
                                    145O2

    When proteins are respiratory substrates the ratio would be about
0.9.
    What is important to recognise is that in living organisms respiratory
substrates are often more than one; pure proteins or fats are never used
as respiratory substrates.




                                              SUMMARY

      Plants unlike animals have no special systems for breathing or gaseous exchange.
      Stomata and lenticels allow gaseous exchange by diffusion. Almost all living cells
      in a plant have their surfaces exposed to air.
          The breaking of C-C bonds of complex organic molecules by oxidation cells
      leading to the release of a lot of energy is called cellular respiration. Glucose is the
      favoured substrate for respiration. Fats and proteins can also be broken down to
      yield energy. The initial stage of cellular respiration takes place in the cytoplasm.
      Each glucose molecule is broken through a series of enzyme catalysed reactions
      into two molecules of pyruvic acid. This process is called glycolysis. The fate of the
      pyruvate depends on the availability of oxygen and the organism. Under anaerobic
      conditions either lactic acid fermentation or alcohol fermentation occurs.
      Fermentation takes place under anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes,
      unicellular eukaryotes and in germinating seeds. In eukaryotic organisms aerobic
      respiration occurs in the presence of oxygen. Pyruvic acid is transported into the
      mitochondria where it is converted into acetyl CoA with the release of CO2. Acetyl
      CoA then enters the tricarboxylic acid pathway or Krebs’ cycle operating in the
      matrix of the mitochondria. NADH + H+ and FADH2 are generated in the Krebs’
      cycle. The energy in these molecules as well as that in the NADH + H+ synthesised
      during glycolysis are used to synthesise ATP. This is accomplished through a




                                                                                                 2017-18
238                                                                                     BIOLOGY


      system of electron carriers called electron transport system (ETS) located on the
      inner membrane of the mitochondria. The electrons, as they move through the
      system, release enough energy that are trapped to synthesise ATP. This is called
      oxidative phosphorylation. In this process O2 is the ultimate acceptor of electrons
      and it gets reduced to water.
          The respiratory pathway is an amphibolic pathway as it involves both anabolism
      and catabolism. The respiratory quotient depends upon the type of respiratory
      substance used during respiration.



                                           EXERCISES

       1. Differentiate between
          (a) Respiration and Combustion
          (b) Glycolysis and Krebs’ cycle
          (c) Aerobic respiration and Fermentation
       2. What are respiratory substrates? Name the most common respiratory substrate.
       3. Give the schematic representation of glycolysis?
       4. What are the main steps in aerobic respiration? Where does it take place?
       5. Give the schematic representation of an overall view of Krebs’ cycle.
       6. Explain ETS.
       7. Distinguish between the following:
          (a) Aerobic respiration and Anaerobic respiration
          (b) Glycolysis and Fermentation
          (c) Glycolysis and Citric acid Cycle
       8. What are the assumptions made during the calculation of net gain of ATP?
       9. Discuss “The respiratory pathway is an amphibolic pathway.”
      10. Define RQ. What is its value for fats?
      11. What is oxidative phosphorylation?
      12. What is the significance of step-wise release of energy in respiration?




                                                                                        2017-18
 290                                                                                       BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 19
                            EXCRETORY PRODUCTS                              AND

                            THEIR ELIMINATION
19.1 Human              Animals accumulate ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, water
     Excretory          and ions like Na+, K+, Cl–, phosphate, sulphate, etc., either by metabolic
     System             activities or by other means like excess ingestion. These substances have
                        to be removed totally or partially. In this chapter, you will learn the
19.2 Urine Formation
                        mechanisms of elimination of these substances with special emphasis on
19.3 Function of the    common nitrogenous wastes. Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major
     Tubules            forms of nitrogenous wastes excreted by the animals. Ammonia is the
                        most toxic form and requires large amount of water for its elimination,
19.4 Mechanism of
                        whereas uric acid, being the least toxic, can be removed with a minimum
     Concentration of
                        loss of water.
     the Filtrate
                            The process of excreting ammonia is Ammonotelism. Many bony fishes,
19.5 Regulation of      aquatic amphibians and aquatic insects are ammonotelic in nature.
     Kidney Function    Ammonia, as it is readily soluble, is generally excreted by diffusion across
                        body surfaces or through gill surfaces (in fish) as ammonium ions. Kidneys
19.6 Micturition
                        do not play any significant role in its removal. Terrestrial adaptation
19.7 Role of other      necessitated the production of lesser toxic nitrogenous wastes like urea
     Organs in          and uric acid for conservation of water. Mammals, many terrestrial
     Excretion          amphibians and marine fishes mainly excrete urea and are called ureotelic
19.8 Disorders of the   animals. Ammonia produced by metabolism is converted into urea in the
     Excretory
                        liver of these animals and released into the blood which is filtered and
                        excreted out by the kidneys. Some amount of urea may be retained in the
     System
                        kidney matrix of some of these animals to maintain a desired osmolarity.
                        Reptiles, birds, land snails and insects excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric
                        acid in the form of pellet or paste with a minimum loss of water and are
                        called uricotelic animals.
    EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                             291


    A survey of animal kingdom presents a variety of excretory structures.
In most of the invertebrates, these structures are simple tubular forms
whereas vertebrates have complex tubular organs called kidneys. Some
of these structures are mentioned here. Protonephridia or flame cells are
the excretory structures in Platyhelminthes (Flatworms, e.g., Planaria),
rotifers, some annelids and the cephalochordate – Amphioxus.
Protonephridia are primarily concerned with ionic and fluid volume
regulation, i.e., osmoregulation. Nephridia are the tubular excretory
structures of earthworms and other annelids. Nephridia help to remove
nitrogenous wastes and maintain a fluid and ionic balance. Malpighian
tubules are the excretory structures of most of the insects including
cockroaches. Malpighian tubules help in the removal of nitrogenous
wastes and osmoregulation. Antennal glands or green glands perform
the excretory function in crustaceans like prawns.


19.1 HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM

In humans, the excretory system consists
of a pair of kidneys, one pair of ureters, a
urinary bladder and a urethra (Figure
19.1). Kidneys are reddish brown, bean
shaped structures situated between the
levels of last thoracic and third lumbar
vertebra close to the dorsal inner wall of
the abdominal cavity. Each kidney of an
adult human measures 10-12 cm in
length, 5-7 cm in width, 2-3 cm in
thickness with an average weight of 120-
170 g. Towards the centre of the inner
concave surface of the kidney is a notch
called hilum through which ureter, blood
vessels and nerves enter. Inner to the hilum
is a broad funnel shaped space called the
renal pelvis with projections called calyces.
The outer layer of kidney is a tough
capsule. Inside the kidney, there are two
zones, an outer cortex and an inner
                                                      Figure 19.1 Human Urinary system
medulla. The medulla is divided into a few
conical masses (medullary pyramids)
projecting into the calyces (sing.: calyx).
The cortex extends in between the
 292                                                                                    BIOLOGY


                                                  medullary pyramids as renal columns called
                                                  Columns of Bertini (Figure 19.2).
                                                      Each kidney has nearly one million
                                                  complex tubular structures called nephrons
                                                  (Figure 19.3), which are the functional units.
                                                  Each nephron has two parts – the
                                                  glomerulus and the renal tubule.
                                                  Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed by
                                                  the afferent arteriole – a fine branch of renal
                                                  artery. Blood from the glomerulus is carried
                                                  away by an efferent arteriole.
                                                      The renal tubule begins with a double
                                                  walled cup-like structure called Bowman’s
                                                  capsule, which encloses the glomerulus.
                                                  Glomerulus alongwith Bowman’s capsule, is
Figure 19.2 Longitudinal section (Diagrammatic)   called the malpighian body or renal
            of Kidney                             corpuscle (Figure 19.4). The tubule
                                                  continues further to form a highly coiled
                                                  network – proximal convoluted tubule




  Figure 19.3   A diagrammatic representation of a nephron showing blood vessels,
                duct and tubule
     EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                             293


(PCT). A hairpin shaped Henle’s loop is the              Afferent arteriole
next part of the tubule which has a
descending and an ascending limb. The                                                Efferent
ascending limb continues as another highly                                           arteriole
coiled tubular region called distal
convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many                                            Bowman’s
nephrons open into a straight tube called                                              capsule
collecting duct, many of which converge and
open into the renal pelvis through medullary
pyramids in the calyces.
    The Malpighian corpuscle, PCT and DCT
of the nephron are situated in the cortical
region of the kidney whereas the loop of Henle
dips into the medulla. In majority of
nephrons, the loop of Henle is too short and
                                                                                Proximal
extends only very little into the medulla. Such                             convoluted tubule
nephrons are called cortical nephrons. In
some of the nephrons, the loop of Henle is Figure 19.4 Malpighian body (renal corpuscle)
very long and runs deep into the medulla.
These nephrons are called juxta medullary
nephrons.
    The efferent arteriole emerging from the glomerulus forms a fine
capillary network around the renal tubule called the peritubular
capillaries. A minute vessel of this network runs parallel to the Henle’s
loop forming a ‘U’ shaped vasa recta. Vasa recta is absent or highly
reduced in cortical nephrons.

19.2 URINE FORMATION

Urine formation involves three main processes namely, glomerular
filtration, reabsorption and secretion, that takes place in different parts of
the nephron.
     The first step in urine formation is the filtration of blood, which is carried
out by the glomerulus and is called glomerular filtration. On an average,
1100-1200 ml of blood is filtered by the kidneys per minute which constitute
roughly 1/5th of the blood pumped out by each ventricle of the heart in a
minute. The glomerular capillary blood pressure causes filtration of blood
through 3 layers, i.e., the endothelium of glomerular blood vessels, the
epithelium of Bowman’s capsule and a basement membrane between these
two layers. The epithelial cells of Bowman’s capsule called podocytes are
arranged in an intricate manner so as to leave some minute spaces called
filtration slits or slit pores. Blood is filtered so finely through these
membranes, that almost all the constituents of the plasma except the
proteins pass onto the lumen of the Bowman’s capsule. Therefore, it is
considered as a process of ultra filtration.
294                                                                       BIOLOGY


           The amount of the filtrate formed by the kidneys per minute is called
      glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR in a healthy individual is
      approximately 125 ml/minute, i.e., 180 litres per day !
           The kidneys have built-in mechanisms for the regulation of glomerular
      filtration rate. One such efficient mechanism is carried out by juxta
      glomerular apparatus (JGA). JGA is a special sensitive region formed by
      cellular modifications in the distal convoluted tubule and the afferent
      arteriole at the location of their contact. A fall in GFR can activate the JG
      cells to release renin which can stimulate the glomerular blood flow and
      thereby the GFR back to normal.
           A comparison of the volume of the filtrate formed per day (180 litres
      per day) with that of the urine released (1.5 litres), suggest that nearly 99
      per cent of the filtrate has to be reabsorbed by the renal tubules. This
      process is called reabsorption. The tubular epithelial cells in different
      segments of nephron perform this either by active or passive mechanisms.
      For example, substances like glucose, amino acids, Na+, etc., in the filtrate
      are reabsorbed actively whereas the nitrogenous wastes are absorbed by
      passive transport. Reabsorption of water also occurs passively in the initial
      segments of the nephron (Figure 19.5).
           During urine formation, the tubular cells secrete substances like H+,
      K+ and ammonia into the filtrate. Tubular secretion is also an important
      step in urine formation as it helps in the maintenance of ionic and acid
      base balance of body fluids.

      19.3 FUNCTION        OF THE   TUBULES
      Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT): PCT is lined by simple cuboidal
      brush border epithelium which increases the surface area for reabsorption.
      Nearly all of the essential nutrients, and 70-80 per cent of electrolytes
      and water are reabsorbed by this segment. PCT also helps to maintain
      the pH and ionic balance of the body fluids by selective secretion of
      hydrogen ions, ammonia and potassium ions into the filtrate and by
      absorption of HCO3– from it.
          Henle’s Loop: Reabsorption is minimum in its ascending limb.
      However, this region plays a significant role in the maintenance of high
      osmolarity of medullary interstitial fluid. The descending limb of loop of
      Henle is permeable to water but almost impermeable to electrolytes. This
      concentrates the filtrate as it moves down. The ascending limb is
      impermeable to water but allows transport of electrolytes actively or
      passively. Therefore, as the concentrated filtrate pass upward, it gets
      diluted due to the passage of electrolytes to the medullary fluid.
          Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT): Conditional reabsorption of Na+
      and water takes place in this segment. DCT is also capable of reabsorption
      of HCO3– and selective secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions and
      NH3 to maintain the pH and sodium-potassium balance in blood.
     EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                             295




       Figure 19.5 Reabsorption and secretion of major substances at different parts of
                   the nephron (Arrows indicate direction of movement of materials.)

    Collecting Duct: This long duct extends from the cortex of the kidney
to the inner parts of the medulla. Large amounts of water could be
reabsorbed from this region to produce a concentrated urine. This segment
allows passage of small amounts of urea into the medullary interstitium
to keep up the osmolarity. It also plays a role in the maintenance of pH
and ionic balance of blood by the selective secretion of H+ and K+ ions
(Figure 19.5).

19.4 MECHANISM         OF   CONCENTRATION     OF THE   FILTRATE
Mammals have the ability to produce a concentrated urine. The Henle’s
loop and vasa recta play a significant role in this. The flow of filtrate in
the two limbs of Henle’s loop is in opposite directions and thus forms a
counter current. The flow of blood through the two limbs of vasa recta is
296                                                                                   BIOLOGY


                   also in a counter current pattern. The proximity between the Henle’s loop
                   and vasa recta, as well as the counter current in them help in maintaining
                   an increasing osmolarity towards the inner medullary interstitium, i.e.,
                   from 300 mOsmolL–1 in the cortex to about 1200 mOsmolL–1 in the inner
                   medulla. This gradient is mainly caused by NaCl and urea. NaCl is
                   transported by the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is exchanged
                   with the descending limb of vasa recta. NaCl is returned to the interstitium
                   by the ascending portion of vasa recta. Similarly, small amounts of urea
                   enter the thin segment of the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is
                   transported back to the interstitium by the collecting tubule. The above
                   described transport of substances facilitated by the special arrangement
                   of Henle’s loop and vasa recta is called the counter current mechanism
                   (Figure. 19.6). This mechanism helps to maintain a concentration gradient




      Figure 19.6 Diagrammatic representation of a nephron and vasa recta showing
                  counter current mechanisms
     EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                     297


in the medullary interstitium. Presence of such interstitial gradient helps
in an easy passage of water from the collecting tubule thereby
concentrating the filtrate (urine). Human kidneys can produce urine nearly
four times concentrated than the initial filtrate formed.


19.5 REGULATION         OF   KIDNEY FUNCTION

The functioning of the kidneys is efficiently monitored and regulated by
hormonal feedback mechanisms involving the hypothalamus, JGA and
to a certain extent, the heart.
    Osmoreceptors in the body are activated by changes in blood volume,
body fluid volume and ionic concentration. An excessive loss of fluid from
the body can activate these receptors which stimulate the hypothalamus
to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin from the
neurohypophysis. ADH facilitates water reabsorption from latter parts of
the tubule, thereby preventing diuresis. An increase in body fluid volume
can switch off the osmoreceptors and suppress the ADH release to complete
the feedback. ADH can also affect the kidney function by its constrictory
effects on blood vessels. This causes an increase in blood pressure. An
increase in blood pressure can increase the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR.
    The JGA plays a complex regulatory role. A fall in glomerular blood
flow/glomerular blood pressure/GFR can activate the JG cells to release
renin which converts angiotensinogen in blood to angiotensin I and
further to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II, being a powerful
vasoconstrictor, increases the glomerular blood pressure and thereby
GFR. Angiotensin II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
Aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na+ and water from
the distal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood
pressure and GFR. This complex mechanism is generally known as
the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism.
    An increase in blood flow to the atria of the heart can cause the release
of Atrial Natriuretic Factor (ANF). ANF can cause vasodilation (dilation of
blood vessels) and thereby decrease the blood pressure. ANF mechanism,
therefore, acts as a check on the renin-angiotensin mechanism.


19.6 MICTURITION

Urine formed by the nephrons is ultimately carried to the urinary bladder
where it is stored till a voluntary signal is given by the central nervous
system (CNS). This signal is initiated by the stretching of the urinary bladder
as it gets filled with urine. In response, the stretch receptors on the walls
of the bladder send signals to the CNS. The CNS passes on motor messages
298                                                                        BIOLOGY


      to initiate the contraction of smooth muscles of the bladder and
      simultaneous relaxation of the urethral sphincter causing the release of
      urine. The process of release of urine is called micturition and the neural
      mechanisms causing it is called the micturition reflex. An adult human
      excretes, on an average, 1 to 1.5 litres of urine per day. The urine formed
      is a light yellow coloured watery fluid which is slightly acidic (pH-6.0)
      and has a characterestic odour. On an average, 25-30 gm of urea is
      excreted out per day. Various conditions can affect the characteristics of
      urine. Analysis of urine helps in clinical diagnosis of many metabolic
      discorders as well as malfunctioning of the kidney. For example, presence
      of glucose (Glycosuria) and ketone bodies (Ketonuria) in urine are
      indicative of diabetes mellitus.

      19.7 ROLE       OF OTHER    ORGANS     IN   EXCRETION
      Other than the kidneys, lungs, liver and skin also help in the elimination
      of excretory wastes.
          Our lungs remove large amounts of CO2 (approximately 200mL/
      minute) and also significant quantities of water every day. Liver, the largest
      gland in our body, secretes bile-containing substances like bilirubin,
      biliverdin, cholesterol, degraded steroid hormones, vitamins and drugs.
      Most of these substances ultimately pass out alongwith digestive wastes.
          The sweat and sebaceous glands in the skin can eliminate certain
      substances through their secretions. Sweat produced by the sweat
      glands is a watery fluid containing NaCl, small amounts of urea, lactic
      acid, etc. Though the primary function of sweat is to facilitate a cooling
      effect on the body surface, it also helps in the removal of some of the
      wastes mentioned above. Sebaceous glands eliminate certain
      substances like sterols, hydrocarbons and waxes through sebum. This
      secretion provides a protective oily covering for the skin. Do you know
      that small amounts of nitrogenous wastes could be eliminated through
      saliva too?


      19.8 DISORDERS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM

      Malfunctioning of kidneys can lead to accumulation of urea in blood,
      a condition called uremia, which is highly harmful and may lead to
      kidney failure. In such patients, urea can be removed by a process
      called hemodialysis. Blood drained from a convenient artery is
      pumped into a dialysing unit after adding an anticoagulant like heparin.
      The unit contains a coiled cellophane tube surrounded by a fluid
      (dialysing fluid) having the same composition as that of plasma except
      the nitrogenous wastes. The porous cellophane membrance of the tube
    EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                                    299


allows the passage of molecules based on concentration gradient. As
nitrogenous wastes are absent in the dialysing fluid, these substances
freely move out, thereby clearing the blood. The cleared blood is
pumped back to the body through a vein after adding anti-heparin to
it. This method is a boon for thousands of uremic patients all over the
world.
     Kidney transplantation is the ultimate method in the correction of
acute renal failures (kidney failure). A functioning kidney is used in
transplantation from a donor, preferably a close relative, to minimise its
chances of rejection by the immune system of the host. Modern clinical
procedures have increased the success rate of such a complicated
technique.
Renal calculi: Stone or insoluble mass of crystallised salts (oxalates,
etc.) formed within the kidney.

Glomerulonephritis: Inflammation of glomeruli of kidney.




                                             SUMMARY

      Many nitrogen containing substances, ions, CO2, water, etc., that accumulate in
      the body have to be eliminated. Nature of nitrogenous wastes formed and their
      excretion vary among animals, mainly depending on the habitat (availability of
      water). Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major nitrogenous wastes excreted.
          Protonephridia, nephridia, malpighian tubules, green glands and the kidneys
      are the common excretory organs in animals. They not only eliminate nitrogenous
      wastes but also help in the maintenance of ionic and acid-base balance of body
      fluids.
          In humans, the excretory system consists of one pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters,
      a urinary bladder and a urethra. Each kidney has over a million tubular structures
      called nephrons. Nephron is the functional unit of kidney and has two portions –
      glomerulus and renal tubule. Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed from afferent
      arterioles, fine branches of renal artery. The renal tubule starts with a double walled
      Bowman’s capsule and is further differentiated into a proximal convoluted tubule
      (PCT), Henle’s loop (HL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
      nephrons join to a common collecting duct many of which ultimately open into the
      renal pelvis through the medullary pyramids. The Bowman’s capsule encloses the
      glomerulus to form Malpighian or renal corpuscle.
          Urine formation involves three main processes, i.e., filtration, reabsorption and
      secretion. Filtration is a non-selective process performed by the glomerulus using
      the glomerular capillary blood pressure. About 1200 ml of blood is filtered by the
300                                                                                         BIOLOGY


      glomerulus per minute to form 125 ml of filtrate in the Bowman’s capsule per
      minute (GFR). JGA, a specialised portion of the nephrons, plays a significant role
      in the regulation of GFR. Nearly 99 per cent reabsorption of the filtrate takes place
      through different parts of the nephrons. PCT is the major site of reabsorption and
      selective secretion. HL primarily helps to maintain osmolar gradient
      (300 mOsmolL–1 -1200 mOsmolL–1) within the kidney interstitium. DCT and
      collecting duct allow extensive reabsorption of water and certain electrolytes, which
      help in osmoregulation: H+, K+ and NH3 could be secreted into the filtrate by the
      tubules to maintain the ionic balance and pH of body fluids.
           A counter current mechanism operates between the two limbs of the loop of
      Henle and those of vasa recta (capillary parallel to Henle’s loop). The filtrate gets
      concentrated as it moves down the descending limb but is diluted by the ascending
      limb. Electrolytes and urea are retained in the interstitium by this arrangement.
      DCT and collecting duct concentrate the filtrate about four times, i.e., from 300
      mOsmolL–1 to 1200 mOsmolL–1, an excellent mechanism of conservation of water.
      Urine is stored in the urinary bladder till a voluntary signal from CNS carries out
      its release through urethra, i.e., micturition. Skin, lungs and liver also assist in
      excretion.



                                            EXERCISES

       1. Define Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
       2. Explain the autoregulatory mechanism of GFR.
       3. Indicate whether the following statements are true or false :
          (a) Micturition is carried out by a reflex.
          (b) ADH helps in water elimination, making the urine hypotonic.
          (c) Protein-free fluid is filtered from blood plasma into the Bowman’s capsule.
          (d) Henle’s loop plays an important role in concentrating the urine.
          (e) Glucose is actively reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.

       4. Give a brief account of the counter current mechanism.
       5. Describe the role of liver, lungs and skin in excretion.
       6. Explain micturition.
       7. Match the items of column I with those of column II :
           Column I                     Column II
           (a) Ammonotelism              (i) Birds
           (b) Bowman’s capsule         (ii) Water reabsorption
           (c) Micturition              (iii) Bony fish
           (d) Uricotelism              (iv) Urinary bladder
           (d) ADH                       (v) Renal tubule
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION                                                     301


   8. What is meant by the term osmoregulation?
   9. Terrestrial animals are generally either ureotelic or uricotelic, not ammonotelic,
      why ?
  10. What is the significance of juxta glomerular apparatus (JGA) in kidney function?
  11. Name the following:
      (a) A chordate animal having flame cells as excretory structures
      (b) Cortical portions projecting between the medullary pyramids in the human
          kidney
      (c) A loop of capillary running parallel to the Henle’s loop.
  12. Fill in the gaps :
      (a) Ascending limb of Henle’s loop is _______ to water whereas the descending
           limb is _______ to it.
      (b) Reabsorption of water from distal parts of the tubules is facilitated by hormone
          _______.
      (c) Dialysis fluid contain all the constituents as in plasma except _______.
      (d) A healthy adult human excretes (on an average) _______ gm of urea/day.
                                                                             ISBN 81-7450-496-6
First Edition
February 2006 Phalguna 1927                                                ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted                                      q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
October 2006 Kartika 1928                         transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
                                                  recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
November 2007 Kartika 1929
                                               q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-
January 2009 Pausa 1930                           sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
January 2010 Magha 1931                           of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
January 2011 Pausa 1932                        q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
                                                  price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
January 2012 Magha 1933                           and should be unacceptable.
December 2012 Pausa 1934
December 2013 Agrahayana 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
May 2016 Vaishakha 1938
March 2017 Phalguna 1938
                                                  OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
                                                  DIVISION, NCERT
PD 230T HK
                                                   NCERT Campus
© National Council of Educational                  Sri Aurobindo Marg
                                                   New Delhi 110 016                                       Phone : 011-26562708
Research and Training, 2006
                                                   108, 100 Feet Road
                                                   Hosdakere Halli Extension
                                                   Banashankari III Stage
                                                   Bangaluru 560 085                                       Phone : 080-26725740

                                                   Navjivan Trust Building
                                                   P.O.Navjivan
                                                   Ahmedabad 380 014                                       Phone : 079-27541446

                                                   CWC Campus
                                                   Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
                                                   Panihati
                                                   Kolkata 700 114                                         Phone : 033-25530454

                                                   CWC Complex
                                                   Maligaon
                                                   Guwahati 781 021                                        Phone : 0361-2674869


` 200.00




                                                   Publication Team
                                                   Head, Publication                           : M. Siraj Anwar
                                                   Division
                                                   Chief Editor                                : Shveta Uppal
                                                   Chief Business                              : Gautam Ganguly
                                                   Manager
                                                   Chief Production                            : Arun Chitkara
                                                   Officer (In-charge)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT                 Assistant Editor                            : Shashi Chadha
watermark                                          Production Assistant                        : Mukesh Gaur
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational                                Cover and Layout
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,                                   Shweta Rao
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Gita
Offset Printers (P) Ltd., C-90, Okhla                                          Illustrations
Industrial Area, Phase-I, New Delhi 110 020                                     Lalit Maurya
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
     The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
     These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
     The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,
Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor K. Muralidhar,
Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook. We are grateful to
their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution.
     As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.



                                                                           Director
New Delhi                                          National Council of Educational
20 December 2005                                            Research and Training




                                        (iv)
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman, Advisory Committee, Inter University Centre for Astronomy
and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune University, Pune

CHIEF ADVISOR
K. Muralidhar, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi

MEMBERS
Ajit Kumar Kavathekar, Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
B.B.P. Gupta, Professor, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
J.S. Gill, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
K. Sarath Chandran, Reader (Zoology), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Nalini Nigam, Reader (Botany), Ramjas College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Pratima Gaur, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Allahabad, Allahabad
Ratnam Kaul Wattal, Reader (Botany), Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.K. Seth, UGC Scientist C, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.P. Singh, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Sangeeta Sharma, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, New Delhi
Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi; Former Fellow, Centre
for Science Education and Communication, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.C. Jain, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Sunaina Sharma, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Dwarka, New Delhi
Tejinder Chawla, PGT (Biology), Guru Harkrishan Public School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
T.N. Lakhanpal, Professor (Retd.), Department of Bio Sciences, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla
U.K. Nanda, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneshwar

MEMBER-COORDINATOR
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT.
A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCER T) gratefully
acknowledges the contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the
development of the Biology textbook for Class XI. The Council is grateful to Arvind
Gupte, Principal (Retd.), Government Collegiate Education Services, Madhya Pradesh;
Shailaja Hittalmani, Associate Professor (Genetics), University of Agricultural Sciences,
Bangalore; K.R. Shivanna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Botany, University of Delhi,
Delhi; R.S. Bedwal, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur;
P.S. Srivastava, Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Hamdard University, New Delhi
and Pramila Shivanna, former Teacher, D.A.V. School, Delhi, for their valuable
suggestions. The Council is also thankful to V.K. Bhasin, Professor and Head,
Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi; P.P. Bakre, Professor and Head,
Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur and Savithri Singh, Principal,
Acharya Narendra Dev College, New Delhi for their support. The Council is also grateful
to B.K. Gupta, Scientist, Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi for providing pictures of
zoological parks and Sameer Singh for the pictures on the front and back cover. All
the other photographs used in the book provided by Savithri Singh and taken at
either at NCERT, IARI Campus or Acharya Narendra Dev College is gratefully
acknowledged.
    NCERT sincerely acknowledges the contributions of the members who participated
in the review of the manuscripts – M.K. Tiwari, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya,
Mandsaur, Madhya Pradesh; Maria Gracias Fernandes, PGT (Biology), G.V.M.S. Higher
Secondary, Ponda, Goa; A.K. Ganguly, PGT (Biology), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya,
Roshnabad, Haridwar; Shivani Goswami, PGT (Biology), The Mother’s International
School, New Delhi and B.N. Pandey, Principal, Ordinance Factory Sr. Sec. School,
Dehradun.
    The Council is highly thankful to M. Chandra, Professor and Head, DESM; Hukum
Singh, Professor, DESM, NCERT for their valuable support throughout the making of
this book.
    The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Deepak Kapoor,
Incharge, Computer Station; Mohd. Khalid Raza and Arvind Sharma, DTP operators;
Saswati Banerjee, Copy Editor; Archana Srivastava, Proof Reader and APC office and
administrative staff of DESM, NCERT.
    The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT in bringing out this publication
are also appreciated.
A NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTS
Biology is the science of life. It is the story of life on earth. It is the science of life forms and
living processes. Biological systems, often appear to challenge physical laws that govern the
behaviour of matter and energy in our world. Historically, biological knowledge was ancillary
to knowledge of human body and its function. The latter as we know, is the basis of medical
practice. However, parts of biological knowledge developed independent of human application.
Fundamental questions about origin of life, the origin and growth of biodiversity, the evolution
of flora and fauna of different habitats, etc., caught the imagination of biologists.
     The very description of living organisms, be it from morphological perspective, physiological
perspective, taxonomical perspective, etc., engaged scientists to such an extent that for sheer
convenience, if not for anything else, the subject matter got artificially divided into the sub-
disciplines of botany and zoology and later into even microbiology. Meanwhile, physical sciences
made heavy inroads into biology, and established biochemistry and biophysics as new sub-
disciplines of biology. Mendel’s work and its rediscovery in the early twentieth century led to
the promotion of study of genetics. The discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA and
the deciphering of three dimensional structures of many macromolecules led to the
establishment of and phenomenal growth in the dominating area of molecular biology. In a
sense, functional disciplines laying emphasis on mechanisms underlying living processes,
received more attention, support, intellectual and social recognition. Biology, unfortunately,
got divided into classical and modern biology. To the majority of practising biologists, pursuit
of biological research became more empirical rather than a curiosity and hypothesis driven
intellectual exercise as is the case with theoretical physics, experimental physics, structural
chemistry and material science. Fortunately and quietly, general unifying principles of biology
were also being discovered, rediscovered and emphasised. The work of Mayr, Dobhzhansky,
Haldane, Perutz, Khorana, Morgan, Darlington, Fisher and many others brought respect and
seriousness to both classical and molecular biological disciplines. Ecology and Systems biology
got established as unifying biological disciplines. Every area of biology began developing
interface with not only other areas of biology but also other disciplines of science and
mathematics. Pretty soon, the boundaries became porous. They are now on the verge of
disappearing altogether. Progress in human biology, biomedical sciences, especially the
structure, functioning and evolution of human brain brought in respect, awe and philosophical
insights to biology. Biology even stepped out of laboratories, museums and natural parks and
raised social, economic and cultural issues capturing the imagination of general public and
hence political attention. Educationists did not lag behind and realised that biology should be
taught as an interdisciplinary and integrating science at all stages of educational training
especially at school and undergraduate levels. A new synthesis of all areas of basic and
applied areas of biology is the need of the hour. Biology has come of age. It has an independent
set of concepts which are universal just like physics and chemistry and mathematics.
     The present volume is the first time presentation of the integrated biology for the school
level children. One of the lacunae in biology teaching and study is the absence of integration
with other disciplinary knowledge of physics, chemistry etc. Further many processes in plants,
animals and microbes are similar when looked from physico-chemical perspective. Cell biology
has brought out the unifying common cellular level activities underlying apparently diverse
phenomena across plants, animals and microbes. Similarly, molecular science (e.g.
biochemistry or molecular biology) has revealed the similar molecular mechanisms in all
these apparently diverse organisms like plants, animals and microbes. Phenomena like
respiration, metabolism, energy utlisation, growth, reproduction and development can be
discussed in a unifying manner rather than as separate unrelated processes in plants and
animals. An attempt has been made to unify such diverse disciplines in the book. The
integration achieved however, is partial and not complete. Hopefully along with changes in
the teaching and learning context, to be brought out in the next few years, the next edition of
this book will reveal more integration of botany, zoology and microbiology and truly reflect the
true nature of biology – the future science of man by man and for man.
    This new textbook of Biology for class XI is a completely rewritten book in view of the
syllabus revision and restructuring. It is also in accordance with the spirit of the National
Curriculum Framework (2005) guidelines. The subject matter is presented under twenty-two
chapters which are grouped under five thematic units. Each unit has a brief write up preceding
the unit highlighting the essence of the chapters to follow under that unit. Each unit also has
a biographical sketch of a prominent scientist in that area. Each chapter has, on the first
page, a detailed table of contents giving sub-headings within the chapter. Decimal system
using arabic numerals has been employed to indicate these sub-headings. At the end of each
chapter a brief summary is provided. This brings to the notice of the student, what she/he is
supposed to have learnt by studying the chapter. A set of questions is also provided at the
conclusion of each chapter. These questions are essentially to enable the student to test
herself/himself as to how much she/he has understood the subject matter. There are questions
which are purely of information recall type; there are questions which need analytical thinking
to answer and hence test true understanding; there are questions which are problems to
solve and finally there are questions which need analysis and speculation as there is no one
to answer to such questions. This tests the critical understanding of the subject matter in the
mind of the student.
    Special emphasis has been given on the narrative style, illustrations, activity exercises,
clarity of expression, coverage of topics within the available time in school. A large number of
extremely talented and dedicated people including practising teachers helped in bringing out
this beautiful book. Our main purpose was to make sure that school level biology is not a
burden for students and teachers. We sincerely wish that teaching biology and learning biology
would become an enjoyable activity.


                                                                      Professor K. Muralidhar
                                                                       Department of Zoology
                                                                           University of Delhi
CONTENTS
FOREWORD                                                           iii
A NOTE   FOR THE     TEACHERS   AND   STUDENTS                     vii


UNIT I
DIVERSITY   IN THE   LIVING WORLD                                1-62
   Chapter 1 : The Living World                                     3
   Chapter 2 : Biological Classification                           16
   Chapter 3 : Plant Kingdom                                       29
   Chapter 4 : Animal Kingdom                                      46


UNIT II
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION         IN   PLANTS   AND   ANIMALS    63-122
   Chapter 5 : Morphology of Flowering Plants                      65
   Chapter 6 : Anatomy of Flowering Plants                         84
   Chapter 7 : Structural Organisation in Animals                 100


UNIT III
CELL : STRUCTURE      AND   FUNCTIONS                         123-172
   Chapter 8 : Cell : The Unit of Life                            125
   Chapter 9 : Biomolecules                                       142
   Chapter 10 : Cell Cycle and Cell Division                      162
UNIT IV
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY                                           173-254
   Chapter 11 : Transport in Plants                            175
   Chapter 12 : Mineral Nutrition                              194
   Chapter 13 : Photosynthesis in Higher Plants                206
   Chapter 14 : Respiration in Plants                          226
   Chapter 15 : Plant Growth and Development                   239



UNIT V
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY                                           255-342
   Chapter 16 : Digestion and Absorption                       257
   Chapter 17 : Breathing and Exchange of Gases                268
   Chapter 18 : Body Fluids and Circulation                    278
   Chapter 19 : Excretory Products and their Elimination       290
   Chapter 20 : Locomotion and Movement                        302
   Chapter 21 : Neural Control and Coordination                315
   Chapter 22 : Chemical Coordination and Integration          330


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL                                     343-346
                                                                          ISBN 81-7450-496-6
First Edition
February 2006 Phalguna 1927                                             ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted                                   q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
October 2006 Kartika 1928                       transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
                                                recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
November 2007 Kartika 1929
                                            q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-
January 2009 Pausa 1930                         sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
January 2010 Magha 1931                         of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
January 2011 Pausa 1932                     q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
                                                price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
January 2012 Magha 1933                         and should be unacceptable.
December 2012 Pausha 1934

PD 250T RPS

© National Council of Educational
                                               OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
Research and Training, 2006
                                               DIVISION, NCERT


                                                NCERT Campus
                                                Sri Aurobindo Marg
                                                New Delhi 110 016                                       Phone : 011-26562708

                                                108, 100 Feet Road
                                                Hosdakere Halli Extension
                                                Banashankari III Stage
                                                Bangaluru 560 085                                       Phone : 080-26725740

                                                Navjivan Trust Building
                                                P.O.Navjivan
                                                Ahmedabad 380 014                                       Phone : 079-27541446

                                                CWC Campus
                                                Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
                                                Panihati
                                                Kolkata 700 114                                         Phone : 033-25530454

                                                CWC Complex
` 165.00                                        Maligaon
                                                Guwahati 781 021                                        Phone : 0361-2674869




                                                Publication Team
                                                Head, Publication                         : Ashok Srivastava
                                                Division
                                                Chief Production                          : Shiv Kumar
                                                Officer
                                                Chief Editor                              : Naresh Yadav
                                                (Incharge)
                                                Chief Business                            : Gautam Ganguly
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT              Manager
watermark                                       Asstt. Production                         : Rajender Chauhan
                                                Officer
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of                                   Cover and Layout
Educational Research and Training,                                         Shweta Rao
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
                                                                            Illustrations
and printed at Sam Industrial Enterprises
                                                                             Lalit Maurya
(P) Ltd., A-17 and 18, Sector 60, Noida
(UP) - 201 301
  162                                                                                        BIOLOGY




                            CHAPTER 10
                            CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
10.1 Cell Cycle        Are you aware that all organisms, even the largest, start their life from a
10.2 M Phase           single cell? You may wonder how a single cell then goes on to form such
                       large organisms. Growth and reproduction are characteristics of cells,
10.3 Significance of
                       indeed of all living organisms. All cells reproduce by dividing into two,
     Mitosis
                       with each parental cell giving rise to two daughter cells each time they
10.4 Meiosis           divide. These newly formed daughter cells can themselves grow and divide,
                       giving rise to a new cell population that is formed by the growth and
10.5 Significance of
                       division of a single parental cell and its progeny. In other words, such
     Meiosis
                       cycles of growth and division allow a single cell to form a structure
                       consisting of millions of cells.


                       10.1 CELL CYCLE

                       Cell division is a very important process in all living organisms. During
                       the division of a cell, DNA replication and cell growth also take place. All
                       these processes, i.e., cell division, DNA replication, and cell growth, hence,
                       have to take place in a coordinated way to ensure correct division and
                       formation of progeny cells containing intact genomes. The sequence of
                       events by which a cell duplicates its genome, synthesises the other
                       constituents of the cell and eventually divides into two daughter cells is
                       termed cell cycle. Although cell growth (in terms of cytoplasmic increase)
                       is a continuous process, DNA synthesis occurs only during one specific
                       stage in the cell cycle. The replicated chromosomes (DNA) are then
                       distributed to daughter nuclei by a complex series of events during cell
                       division. These events are themselves under genetic control.
      CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION                                                               163


10.1.1 Phases of Cell Cycle
A typical eukaryotic cell cycle is illustrated by
human cells in culture. These cells divide once
in approximately every 24 hours (Figure 10.1).
However, this duration of cell cycle can vary
from organism to organism and also from cell
type to cell type. Yeast for example, can progress
through the cell cycle in only about 90 minutes.
    The cell cycle is divided into two basic
phases:
  l    Interphase


                                                     M
                                                       Ph
  l    M Phase (Mitosis phase)


                                                         as
                                                            e
    The M Phase represents the phase when the
actual cell division or mitosis occurs and the
interphase represents the phase between two
successive M phases. It is significant to note Figure 10.1 A diagrammatic view of cell cycle
                                                                  indicating formation of two cells
that in the 24 hour average duration of cell
                                                                  from one cell
cycle of a human cell, cell division proper lasts
for only about an hour. The interphase lasts
more than 95% of the duration of cell cycle.
    The M Phase starts with the nuclear division, corresponding to the
separation of daughter chromosomes (karyokinesis) and usually ends
with division of cytoplasm (cytokinesis). The interphase, though called
the resting phase, is the time during which the cell is preparing for division
by undergoing both cell growth and DNA replication in an orderly manner.
The interphase is divided into three further phases:
  l   G1 phase (Gap 1)
  l   S phase (Synthesis)
  l   G2 phase (Gap 2)                                                         How do plants and
                                                                               animals continue to
     G1 phase corresponds to the interval between mitosis and initiation       grow all their lives?
of DNA replication. During G1 phase the cell is metabolically active and       Do all cells in a plant
                                                                               divide all the time?
continuously grows but does not replicate its DNA. S or synthesis phase
                                                                               Do you think all cells
marks the period during which DNA synthesis or replication takes place.        continue to divide in
During this time the amount of DNA per cell doubles. If the initial amount     all     plants      and
of DNA is denoted as 2C then it increases to 4C. However, there is no          animals? Can you
increase in the chromosome number; if the cell had diploid or 2n number        tell the name and the
of chromosomes at G1, even after S phase the number of chromosomes             location of tissues
                                                                               having cells that
remains the same, i.e., 2n.
                                                                               divide all their life in
    In animal cells, during the S phase, DNA replication begins in the         higher plants? Do
nucleus, and the centriole duplicates in the cytoplasm. During the G2          animals have similar
phase, proteins are synthesised in preparation for mitosis while cell growth   meristematic
continues.                                                                     tissues?
164                                                                                               BIOLOGY



You have studied             Some cells in the adult animals do not appear to exhibit division (e.g.,
mitosis in onion root    heart cells) and many other cells divide only occasionally, as needed to
tip cells. It has 16     replace cells that have been lost because of injury or cell death. These
chromosomes         in   cells that do not divide further exit G1 phase to enter an inactive stage
each cell. Can you
                         called quiescent stage (G0) of the cell cycle. Cells in this stage remain
tell    how     many
chromosomes will         metabolically active but no longer proliferate unless called on to do so
the cell have at G 1     depending on the requirement of the organism.
phase, after S phase,        In animals, mitotic cell division is only seen in the diploid somatic
and after M phase?
                         cells. Against this, the plants can show mitotic divisions in both haploid
Also, what will be the
DNA content of the       and diploid cells. From your recollection of examples of alternation of
cells at G 1, after S    generations in plants (Chapter 3) identify plant species and stages at which
and at G 2 , if the      mitosis is seen in haploid cells.
content after M
phase is 2C?
                         10.2 M PHASE

                         This is the most dramatic period of the cell cycle, involving a major
                         reorganisation of virtually all components of the cell. Since the number of
                         chromosomes in the parent and progeny cells is the same, it is also called as
                         equational division. Though for convenience mitosis has been divided
                         into four stages of nuclear division, it is very essential to understand that cell
                         division is a progressive process and very clear-cut lines cannot be drawn
                         between various stages. Mitosis is divided into the following four stages:
                           l     Prophase
                           l     Metaphase
                           l     Anaphase
                           l     Telophase


                         10.2.1 Prophase
                         Prophase which is the first stage of mitosis follows the S and G2 phases of
                         interphase. In the S and G2 phases the new DNA molecules formed are not
                         distinct but intertwined. Prophase is marked by the initiation of condensation
                         of chromosomal material. The chromosomal material becomes untangled
                         during the process of chromatin condensation (Figure 10.2 a). The centriole,
                         which had undergone duplication during S phase of interphase, now begins
                         to move towards opposite poles of the cell. The completion of prophase can
                         thus be marked by the following characteristic events:
                             l Chromosomal material condenses to form compact mitotic
                                 chromosomes. Chromosomes are seen to be composed of two
                                 chromatids attached together at the centromere.
                             l Initiation of the assembly of mitotic spindle, the microtubules, the
                                 proteinaceous components of the cell cytoplasm help in the
                                 process.
     CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION                                                       165


    Cells at the end of prophase, when viewed under the
microscope, do not show golgi complexes, endoplasmic
reticulum, nucleolus and the nuclear envelope.

10.2.2 Metaphase
The complete disintegration of the nuclear envelope marks
the start of the second phase of mitosis, hence the
chromosomes are spread through the cytoplasm of the cell.
By this stage, condensation of chromosomes is completed
and they can be observed clearly under the microscope. This
then, is the stage at which morphology of chromosomes is
most easily studied. At this stage, metaphase chromosome
is made up of two sister chromatids, which are held together
by the centromere (Figure 10.2 b). Small disc-shaped
structures at the surface of the centromeres are called
kinetochores. These structures serve as the sites of attachment
of spindle fibres (formed by the spindle fibres) to the
chromosomes that are moved into position at the centre of
the cell. Hence, the metaphase is characterised by all the
chromosomes coming to lie at the equator with one chromatid
of each chromosome connected by its kinetochore to spindle
fibres from one pole and its sister chromatid connected by
its kinetochore to spindle fibres from the opposite pole (Figure
10.2 b). The plane of alignment of the chromosomes at
metaphase is referred to as the metaphase plate. The key
features of metaphase are:
   l   Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of
       chromosomes.
   l   Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get
       aligned along metaphase plate through spindle fibres
       to both poles.

10.2.3 Anaphase
At the onset of anaphase, each chromosome arranged at
the metaphase plate is split simultaneously and the two
daughter chromatids, now referred to as chromosomes of
the future daughter nuclei, begin their migration towards
the two opposite poles. As each chromosome moves away
from the equatorial plate, the centromere of each
chromosome is towards the pole and hence at the leading
edge, with the arms of the chromosome trailing behind
                                                          Figure 10.2 a and b : A diagrammatic
(Figure 10.2 c). Thus, anaphase stage is characterised by view of stages in mitosis
 166                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                                     the following key events:
                                     l   Centromeres split and chromatids separate.
                                     l   Chromatids move to opposite poles.


                                     10.2.4 Telophase
                                     At the beginning of the final stage of mitosis, i.e., telophase,
                                     the chromosomes that have reached their respective poles
                                     decondense and lose their individuality. The individual
                                     chromosomes can no longer be seen and chromatin material
                                     tends to collect in a mass in the two poles (Figure 10.2 d).
                                     This is the stage which shows the following key events:
                                     l   Chromosomes cluster at opposite spindle poles and their
                                         identity is lost as discrete elements.
                                     l   Nuclear envelope assembles around the chromosome
                                         clusters.
                                     l   Nucleolus, golgi complex and ER reform.

                                     10.2.5 Cytokinesis
                                    Mitosis accomplishes not only the segregation of duplicated
                                    chromosomes into daughter nuclei (karyokinesis), but the
                                    cell itself is divided into two daughter cells by a separate
                                    process called cytokinesis at the end of which cell division is
                                    complete (Figure 10.2 e). In an animal cell, this is achieved
                                    by the appearance of a furrow in the plasma membrane.
                                    The furrow gradually deepens and ultimately joins in the
                                    centre dividing the cell cytoplasm into two. Plant cells
                                    however, are enclosed by a relatively inextensible cell wall,
                                    thererfore they undergo cytokinesis by a different
                                    mechanism. In plant cells, wall formation starts in the centre
                                    of the cell and grows outward to meet the existing lateral
                                    walls. The formation of the new cell wall begins with the
                                    formation of a simple precursor, called the cell-plate that
                                    represents the middle lamella between the walls of two
                                    adjacent cells. At the time of cytoplasmic division, organelles
                                    like mitochondria and plastids get distributed between the
                                    two daughter cells. In some organisms karyokinesis is not
                                    followed by cytokinesis as a result of which multinucleate
                                    condition arises leading to the formation of syncytium (e.g.,
Figure 10.2 c to e : A diagrammatic liquid endosperm in coconut).
view of stages in Mitosis
     CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION                                                 167


10.3     Significance of Mitosis
Mitosis or the equational division is usually restricted to the diploid cells
only. However, in some lower plants and in some social insects haploid
cells also divide by mitosis. It is very essential to understand the
significance of this division in the life of an organism. Are you aware of
some examples where you have studied about haploid and diploid insects?
    Mitosis usually results in the production of diploid daughter cells
with identical genetic complement. The growth of multicellular organisms
is due to mitosis. Cell growth results in disturbing the ratio between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. It therefore becomes essential for the cell to
divide to restore the nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio. A very significant
contribution of mitosis is cell repair. The cells of the upper layer of the
epidermis, cells of the lining of the gut, and blood cells are being constantly
replaced. Mitotic divisions in the meristematic tissues – the apical and
the lateral cambium, result in a continuous growth of plants throughout
their life.


10.4 MEIOSIS
The production of offspring by sexual reproduction includes the fusion
of two gametes, each with a complete haploid set of chromosomes. Gametes
are formed from specialised diploid cells. This specialised kind of cell
division that reduces the chromosome number by half results in the
production of haploid daughter cells. This kind of division is called
meiosis. Meiosis ensures the production of haploid phase in the life cycle
of sexually reproducing organisms whereas fertilisation restores the diploid
phase. We come across meiosis during gametogenesis in plants and
animals. This leads to the formation of haploid gametes. The key features
of meiosis are as follows:
l   Meiosis involves two sequential cycles of nuclear and cell division called
    meiosis I and meiosis II but only a single cycle of DNA replication.
l   Meiosis I is initiated after the parental chromosomes have replicated
    to produce identical sister chromatids at the S phase.
l   Meiosis involves pairing of homologous chromosomes and
    recombination between them.
l   Four haploid cells are formed at the end of meiosis II.
    Meiotic events can be grouped under the following phases:

                        Meiosis I           Meiosis II
                        Prophase I          Prophase II
                        Metaphase I         Metaphase II
                        Anaphase I          Anaphase II
                        Telophase I         Telophase II
168                                                                    BIOLOGY


      10.4.1 Meiosis I
      Prophase I: Prophase of the first meiotic division is typically longer and
      more complex when compared to prophase of mitosis. It has been further
      subdivided into the following five phases based on chromosomal
      behaviour, i.e., Leptotene, Zygotene, Pachytene, Diplotene and Diakinesis.
          During leptotene stage the chromosomes become gradually visible
      under the light microscope. The compaction of chromosomes continues
      throughout leptotene. This is followed by the second stage of prophase
      I called zygotene. During this stage chromosomes start pairing together
      and this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired
      chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. Electron
      micrographs of this stage indicate that chromosome synapsis is
      accompanied by the formation of complex structure called
      synaptonemal complex. The complex formed by a pair of synapsed
      homologous chromosomes is called a bivalent or a tetrad. However,
      these are more clearly visible at the next stage. The first two stages of
      prophase I are relatively short-lived compared to the next stage that is
      pachytene. During this stage bivalent chromosomes now clearly appears
      as tetrads. This stage is characterised by the appearance of
      recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over occurs between
      non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. Crossing over
      is the exchange of genetic material between two homologous
      chromosomes. Crossing over is also an enzyme-mediated process and
      the enzyme involved is called recombinase. Crossing over leads to
      recombination of genetic material on the two chromosomes.
      Recombination between homologous chromosomes is completed by
      the end of pachytene, leaving the chromosomes linked at the sites of
      crossing over.
          The beginning of diplotene is recognised by the dissolution of the
      synaptonemal complex and the tendency of the recombined
      homologous chromosomes of the bivalents to separate from each other
      except at the sites of crossovers. These X-shaped structures, are called
      chiasmata. In oocytes of some vertebrates, diplotene can last for
      months or years.
          The final stage of meiotic prophase I is diakinesis. This is marked by
      terminalisation of chiasmata. During this phase the chromosomes are
      fully condensed and the meiotic spindle is assembled to prepare the
      homologous chromosomes for separation. By the end of diakinesis, the
      nucleolus disappears and the nuclear envelope also breaks down.
      Diakinesis represents transition to metaphase.
      Metaphase I: The bivalent chromosomes align on the equatorial plate
      (Figure 10.3). The microtubules from the opposite poles of the spindle
      attach to the pair of homologous chromosomes.
     CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION                                                169




                                  Figure 10.3 Stages of Meiosis I


Anaphase I: The homologous chromosomes separate, while sister
chromatids remain associated at their centromeres (Figure 10.3).
Telophase I: The nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear, cytokinesis
follows and this is called as dyad of cells (Figure 10.3). Although in many
cases the chromosomes do undergo some dispersion, they do not reach
the extremely extended state of the interphase nucleus. The stage between
the two meiotic divisions is called interkinesis and is generally short lived.
Interkinesis is followed by prophase II, a much simpler prophase than
prophase I.

10.4.2 Meiosis II
Prophase II: Meiosis II is initiated immediately after cytokinesis, usually
before the chromosomes have fully elongated. In contrast to meiosis I,
meiosis II resembles a normal mitosis. The nuclear membrane disappears
by the end of prophase II (Figure 10.4). The chromosomes again become
compact.
Metaphase II: At this stage the chromosomes align at the equator and
the microtubules from opposite poles of the spindle get attached to the
kinetochores (Figure 10.4) of sister chromatids.
Anaphase II: It begins with the simultaneous splitting of the centromere
of each chromosome (which was holding the sister chromatids together),
allowing them to move toward opposite poles of the cell (Figure 10.4).
170                                                                                     BIOLOGY




                               Figure 10.4 Stages of Meiosis II

                      Telophase II: Meiosis ends with telophase II, in which the two
                      groups of chromosomes once again get enclosed by a nuclear
                      envelope; cytokinesis follows resulting in the formation of tetrad
                      of cells i.e., four haploid daughter cells (Figure 10.4).


                      10.5 SIGNIFICANCE       OF   MEIOSIS
                      Meiosis is the mechanism by which conservation of specific
                      chromosome number of each species is achieved across
                      generations in sexually reproducing organisms, even though the
                      process, per se, paradoxically, results in reduction of chromosome
                      number by half. It also increases the genetic variability in the
                      population of organisms from one generation to the next. Variations
                      are very important for the process of evolution.



                                          SUMMARY

      According to the cell theory, cells arise from preexisting cells. The process by
      which this occurs is called cell division. Any sexually reproducing organism
      starts its life cycle from a single-celled zygote. Cell division does not stop with
      the formation of the mature organism but continues throughout its life cycle.
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION                                                                171


  The stages through which a cell passes from one division to the next is called
  the cell cycle. Cell cycle is divided into two phases called (i) Interphase – a
  period of preparation for cell division, and (ii) Mitosis (M phase) – the actual
  period of cell division. Interphase is further subdivided into G1, S and G 2. G1
  phase is the period when the cell grows and carries out normal metabolism.
  Most of the organelle duplication also occurs during this phase. S phase marks
  the phase of DNA replication and chromosome duplication. G2 phase is the
  period of cytoplasmic growth. Mitosis is also divided into four stages namely
  prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase. Chromosome condensation
  occurs during prophase. Simultaneously, the centrioles move to the opposite
  poles. The nuclear envelope and the nucleolus disappear and the spindle
  fibres start appearing. Metaphase is marked by the alignment of chromosomes
  at the equatorial plate. During anaphase the centromeres divide and the
  chromatids start moving towards the two opposite poles. Once the chromatids
  reach the two poles, the chromosomal elongation starts, nucleolus and the
  nuclear membrane reappear. This stage is called the telophase. Nuclear
  division is then followed by the cytoplasmic division and is called cytokinesis.
  Mitosis thus, is the equational division in which the chromosome number of
  the parent is conserved in the daughter cell.
       In contrast to mitosis, meiosis occurs in the diploid cells, which are destined to
  form gametes. It is called the reduction division since it reduces the chromosome
  number by half while making the gametes. In sexual reproduction when the two
  gametes fuse the chromosome number is restored to the value in the parent.
  Meiosis is divided into two phases – meiosis I and meiosis II. In the first meiotic
  division the homologous chromosomes pair to form bivalents, and undergo crossing
  over. Meiosis I has a long prophase, which is divided further into five phases.
  These are leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During
  metaphase I the bivalents arrange on the equatorial plate. This is followed by
  anaphase I in which homologous chromosomes move to the opposite poles with
  both their chromatids. Each pole receives half the chromosome number of the
  parent cell. In telophase I, the nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear. Meiosis
  II is similar to mitosis. During anaphase II the sister chromatids separate. Thus at
  the end of meiosis four haploid cells are formed.



                                       EXERCISES

   1. What is the average cell cycle span for a mammalian cell?
   2. Distinguish cytokinesis from karyokinesis.
   3. Describe the events taking place during interphase.
   4. What is Go (quiescent phase) of cell cycle?
172                                                                                       BIOLOGY


       5. Why is mitosis called equational division?
       6. Name the stage of cell cycle at which one of the following events occur:
            (i) Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator.
           (ii) Centromere splits and chromatids separate.
           (iii) Pairing between homologous chromosomes takes place.
           (iv) Crossing over between homologous chromosomes takes place.
       7. Describe the following:
           (a) synapsis (b) bivalent (c) chiasmata
           Draw a diagram to illustrate your answer.
       8. How does cytokinesis in plant cells differ from that in animal cells?
       9. Find examples where the four daughter cells from meiosis are equal in size and
          where they are found unequal in size.
      10. Distinguish anaphase of mitosis from anaphase I of meiosis.
      11. List the main differences between mitosis and meiosis.
      12. What is the significance of meiosis?
      13. Discuss with your teacher about
            (i) haploid insects and lower plants where cell-division occurs, and
           (ii) some haploid cells in higher plants where cell-division does not occur.
      14. Can there be mitosis without DNA replication in ‘S’ phase?
      15. Can there be DNA replication without cell division?
      16. Analyse the events during every stage of cell cycle and notice how the following
          two parameters change
            (i) number of chromosomes (N) per cell
           (ii) amount of DNA content (C) per cell
     PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                              239




                             CHAPTER 15
                             PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
15.1 Growth            You have already studied the organisation of a flowering plant in Chapter
                       5. Have you ever thought about where and how the structures like roots,
15.2 Differentiation,
                       stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds arise and that too in an orderly
     Dedifferentiation
     and
                       sequence? You are, by now, aware of the terms seed, seedling, plantlet,
     Redifferentiation mature plant. You have also seen that trees continue to increase in height
                       or girth over a period of time. However, the leaves, flowers and fruits of the
15.3 Development       same tree not only have limited dimensions but also appear and fall
15.4 Plant Growth      periodically and some time repeatedly. Why does vegetative phase precede
     Regulators        flowering in a plant? All plant organs are made up of a variety of tissues;
                       is there any relationship between the structure of a cell, a tissue, an organ
15.5 Photoperiodism
                       and the function they perform? Can the structure and the function of
15.6 Vernalisation     these be altered? All cells of a plant are descendents of the zygote. The
                       question is, then, why and how do they have different structural and
                       functional attributes? Development is the sum of two processes: growth
                       and differentiation. To begin with, it is essential and sufficient to know
                       that the development of a mature plant from a zygote (fertilised egg) follow
                       a precise and highly ordered succession of events. During this process a
                       complex body organisation is formed that produces roots, leaves,
                       branches, flowers, fruits, and seeds, and eventually they die (Figure 15.1).
                              In this chapter, you shall also study some of the factors which govern
                       and control these developmental processes. These factors are both intrinsic
                       (internal) and extrinsic (external) to the plant.
240                                                                                       BIOLOGY




                            Epicotyl
                             hook

        Seed coat

                                                       Epicotyl
                              Cotyledons
Soil line   Cotyledon


                                                         Hypocotyl
                Hypocotyl




                Figure 15.1 Germination and seedling development in bean


                    15.1 GROWTH

                    Growth is regarded as one of the most fundamental and conspicuous
                    characteristics of a living being. What is growth? Growth can be defined
                    as an irreversible permanent increase in size of an organ or its parts or
                    even of an individual cell. Generally, growth is accompanied by metabolic
                    processes (both anabolic and catabolic), that occur at the expense of
                    energy. Therefore, for example, expansion of a leaf is growth. How would
                    you describe the swelling of piece of wood when placed in water?

                    15.1.1 Plant Growth Generally is Indeterminate
                    Plant growth is unique because plants retain the capacity for unlimited
                    growth throughout their life. This ability of the plants is due to the presence
                    of meristems at certain locations in their body. The cells of such meristems
                    have the capacity to divide and self-perpetuate. The product, however,
                    soon loses the capacity to divide and such cells make up the plant body.
                    This form of growth wherein new cells are always being added to the
                    plant body by the activity of the meristem is called the open form of growth.
                    What would happen if the meristem ceases to divide? Does this ever
                    happen?
                        In Chapter 6, you have studied about the root apical meristem and
                    the shoot apical meristem. You know that they are responsible for the
     PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                             241


primary growth of the plants and principally                                   Shoot apical
contribute to the elongation of the plants along                               meristem
their axis. You also know that in dicotyledonous
plants and gymnosperms, the lateral meristems,
vascular cambium and cork-cambium appear
later in life. These are the meristems that cause             Shoot           Vascular
the increase in the girth of the organs in which                              cambium
they are active. This is known as secondary
growth of the plant (see Figure 15.2).

15.1.2 Growth is Measurable
Growth, at a cellular level, is principally a                           Vascular
consequence of increase in the amount of               Root             cambium
protoplasm. Since increase in protoplasm is
difficult to measure directly, one generally
measures some quantity which is more or less
proportional to it. Growth is, therefore,
measured by a variety of parameters some of
                                                                       Root apical
which are: increase in fresh weight, dry weight,                        meristem
length, area, volume and cell number. You may
find it amazing to know that one single maize Figure 15.2 Diagrammatic representation of
                                                          locations of root apical meristem,
root apical mersitem can give rise to more than           shoot aplical meristem and
17,500 new cells per hour, whereas cells in a             vascular cambium. Arrows exhibit
watermelon may increase in size by upto                   the direction of growth of cells and
3,50,000 times. In the former, growth is                  organ
expressed as increase in cell number; the latter
expresses growth as increase in size of the cell.
While the growth of a pollen tube is measured
in terms of its length, an increase in surface area
denotes the growth in a dorsiventral leaf.

15.1.3 Phases of Growth
The period of growth is generally divided into
three phases, namely, meristematic, elongation                                           G
                                                                                         F
and maturation (Figure 15.3). Let us                                                     E
understand this by looking at the root tips. The                                         D
constantly dividing cells, both at the root apex
                                                                                         C
and the shoot apex, represent the meristematic
phase of growth. The cells in this region are rich                                     B
in protoplasm, possess large conspicuous
                                                                                      A
nuclei. Their cell walls are primary in nature,
thin and cellulosic with abundant                    Figure 15.3 Detection of zones of elongation by
plasmodesmatal connections. The cells                            the parallel line technique. Zones
                                                                 A, B, C, D immediately behind the
proximal (just next, away from the tip) to the
                                                                 apex have elongated most.
242                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      meristematic zone represent the phase of elongation. Increased
                      vacuolation, cell enlargement and new cell wall deposition are the
                      characteristics of the cells in this phase. Further away from the apex, i.e.,
                      more proximal to the phase of elongation, lies the portion of axis which is
                      undergoing the phase of maturation. The cells of this zone, attain their
                      maximal size in terms of wall thickening and protoplasmic modifications.
                      Most of the tissues and cell types you have studied in Chapter 6 represent
                      this phase.

                      15.1.4 Growth Rates
                      The increased growth per unit time is termed as growth rate. Thus, rate
                      of growth can be expressed mathematically. An organism, or a part of the
                      organism can produce more cells in a variety of ways.




      Figure15.4 Diagrammatic representation of : (a) Arithmetic (b) Geometric growth and
                 (c) Stages during embryo development showing geometric and arithematic
                 phases
     PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                                                    243


    The growth rate shows an increase that may be
arithmetic or geometrical (Figure 15.4).
    In arithmetic growth, following mitotic cell
division, only one daughter cell continues to divide
while the other differentiates and matures. The
simplest expression of arithmetic growth is
exemplified by a root elongating at a constant rate.
Look at Figure 15.5. On plotting the length of the
organ against time, a linear curve is obtained.
Mathematically, it is expressed as
Lt = L0 + rt
Lt = length at time ‘t’
L0 = length at time ‘zero’
r   = growth rate / elongation per unit time.
    Let us now see what happens in geometrical
growth. In most systems, the initial growth is slow
(lag phase), and it increases rapidly thereafter – at
an exponential rate (log or exponential phase). Here,       Figure 15.5 Constant linear growth, a plot
both the progeny cells following mitotic cell division                  of length L against time t
retain the ability to divide and continue to do so.
However, with limited nutrient supply, the growth
slows down leading to a stationary phase. If we plot
the parameter of growth against time, we get a typical
sigmoid or S-curve (Figure 15.6). A sigmoid curve
is a characteristic of living organism growing in a
natural environment. It is typical for all cells, tissues                                                 Stationary phase
and organs of a plant. Can you think of more similar
                                                              Size/weight of the organ




examples? What kind of a curve can you expect in
                                                                                                      e




a tree showing seasonal activities?
                                                                                                   as
                                                                                               ph




The exponential growth can be expressed as
                                                                                              ial




W1 = W0 ert
                                                                                              nt
                                                                                            ne




W1 = final size (weight, height, number etc.)
                                                                                          po
                                                                                         Ex




W0 = initial size at the beginning of the period
r   = growth rate
t   = time of growth                                                                     Lag phase
e   = base of natural logarithms
                                                                                              Time
Here, r is the relative growth rate and is also the         Figure 15.6 An idealised sigmoid growth
measure of the ability of the plant to produce new                      curve typical of cells in culture,
plant material, referred to as efficiency index. Hence,                 and many higher plants and
the final size of W1 depends on the initial size, W0.                   plant organs
244                                                                                       BIOLOGY




      Figure15.7 Diagrammatic comparison of absolute and relative growth rates. Both
                 leaves A and B have increased their area by 5 cm2 in a given time to
                 produce A1, B1 leaves.

                        Quantitative comparisons between the growth of living system can
                    also be made in two ways : (i) measurement and the comparison of total
                    growth per unit time is called the absolute growth rate. (ii) The growth of
                    the given system per unit time expressed on a common basis, e.g., per
                    unit initial parameter is called the relative growth rate. In Figure 15.7
                    two leaves, A and B, are drawn that are of different sizes but shows
                    absolute increase in area in the given time to give leaves, A1 and B1. However,
                    one of them shows much higher relative growth rate. Which one and why?

                    15.1.5 Conditions for Growth
                    Why do you not try to write down what you think are necessary conditions
                    for growth? This list may have water, oxygen and nutrients as very essential
                    elements for growth. The plant cells grow in size by cell enlargement which
                    in turn requires water. Turgidity of cells helps in extension growth. Thus,
                    plant growth and further development is intimately linked to the water
                    status of the plant. Water also provides the medium for enzymatic activities
                    needed for growth. Oxygen helps in releasing metabolic energy essential
                    for growth activities. Nutrients (macro and micro essential elements) are
                    required by plants for the synthesis of protoplasm and act as source of
                    energy.
                         In addition, every plant organism has an optimum temperature range
                    best suited for its growth. Any deviation from this range could be
                    detrimental to its survival. Environmental signals such as light and gravity
                    also affect certain phases/stages of growth.
     PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                               245


15.2 DIFFERENTIATION, DEDIFFERENTIATION AND
     REDIFFERENTIATION

The cells derived from root apical and shoot-apical meristems and
cambium differentiate and mature to perform specific functions. This act
leading to maturation is termed as differentiation. During differentiation,
cells undergo few to major structural changes both in their cell walls and
protoplasm. For example, to form a tracheary element, the cells would
lose their protoplasm. They also develop a very strong, elastic,
lignocellulosic secondary cell walls, to carry water to long distances even
under extreme tension. Try to correlate the various anatomical features
you encounter in plants to the functions they perform.
    Plants show another interesting phenomenon. The living differentiated
cells, that by now have lost the capacity to divide can regain the capacity
of division under certain conditions. This phenomenon is termed as
dedifferentiation. For example, formation of meristems – interfascicular
cambium and cork cambium from fully differentiated parenchyma cells.
While doing so, such meristems/tissues are able to divide and produce
cells that once again lose the capacity to divide but mature to perform
specific functions, i.e., get redifferentiated. List some of the tissues in a
woody dicotyledenous plant that are the products of redifferentiation.
How would you describe a tumour? What would you call the parenchyma
cells that are made to divide under controlled laboratory conditions during
plant tissue culture?
    Recall, in Section 15.1.1, we have mentioned that the growth in plants
is open, i.e., it can be indeterminate or determinate. Now, we may say that
even differentiation in plants is open, because cells/tissues arising out of
the same meristem have different structures at maturity. The final
structure at maturity of a cell/tissue is also determined by the location of
the cell within. For example, cells positioned away from root apical
meristems differentiate as root-cap cells, while those pushed to the
periphery mature as epidermis. Can you add a few more examples of
open differentiation correlating the position of a cell to its position in an
organ?


15.3     DEVELOPMENT

Development is a term that includes all changes that an organism goes
through during its life cycle from germination of the seed to senescence.
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of processes which
constitute the development of a cell of a higher plant is given in Figure
15.8. It is also applicable to tissues/organs.
246                                                                                      BIOLOGY


              Cell Division                                 Death


                                                                        SENESCENCE



                     Plasmatic growth            Differentiation
  MERISTEMATIC
      CELL
                                                                                MATURE
                                   Expansion               Maturation            CELL
                                  (Elongation)



        Figure 15.8 Sequence of the developmental process in a plant cell

                      Plants follow different pathways in response to environment or phases
                 of life to form different kinds of structures. This ability is called plasticity,
                 e.g., heterophylly in cotton, coriander and larkspur. In such plants, the
                 leaves of the juvenile plant are different in shape from those in mature
                 plants. On the other hand, difference in shapes of leaves produced in air
                 and those produced in water in buttercup also represent the
                 heterophyllous development due to environment (Figure 15.9). This
                 phenomenon of heterophylly is an example of plasticity.




             Figure 15.9 Heterophylly in (a) larkspur and (b) buttercup
    PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                         247


    Thus, growth, differentiation and development are very closely related
events in the life of a plant. Broadly, development is considered as the
sum of growth and differentiation. Development in plants (i.e., both growth
and differentiation) is under the control of intrinsic and extrinsic factors.
The former includes both intracellular (genetic) or intercellular factors
(chemicals such as plant growth regulators) while the latter includes light,
temperature, water, oxygen, nutrition, etc.

15.4 PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS
15.4.1 Characteristics
The plant growth regulators (PGRs) are small, simple molecules of diverse
chemical composition. They could be indole compounds (indole-3-acetic
acid, IAA); adenine derivatives (N 6-furfurylamino purine, kinetin),
derivatives of carotenoids (abscisic acid, ABA); terpenes (gibberellic acid,
GA3) or gases (ethylene, C2H4). Plant growth regulators are variously
described as plant growth substances, plant hormones or phytohormones
in literature.
     The PGRs can be broadly divided into two groups based on their
functions in a living plant body. One group of PGRs are involved in growth
promoting activities, such as cell division, cell enlargement, pattern
formation, tropic growth, flowering, fruiting and seed formation. These
are also called plant growth promoters, e.g., auxins, gibberellins and
cytokinins. The PGRs of the other group play an important role in plant
responses to wounds and stresses of biotic and abiotic origin. They are
also involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as dormancy
and abscission. The PGR abscisic acid belongs to this group. The gaseous
PGR, ethylene, could fit either of the groups, but it is largely an inhibitor
of growth activities.

15.4.2 The Discovery of Plant Growth Regulators
Interestingly, the discovery of each of the five
major groups of PGRs have been accidental. All
this started with the observation of Charles
Darwin and his son Francis Darwin when they
observed that the coleoptiles of canary grass
responded to unilateral illumination by growing
towards the light source (phototropism). After
a series of experiments, it was concluded that
the tip of coleoptile was the site of transmittable a         b       c           d
influence that caused the bending of the entire Figure 15.10 Experiment used to demonstrate
coleoptile (Figure 15.10). Auxin was isolated by             that tip of the coleoptile is the
F.W. Went from tips of coleoptiles of oat                    source of auxin. Arrows indicate
seedlings.                                                   direction of light
248                                                                       BIOLOGY


          The ‘bakane’ (foolish seedling) disease of rice seedlings, was caused
      by a fungal pathogen Gibberella fujikuroi. E. Kurosawa reported the
      appearance of symptoms of the disease in uninfected rice seedlings when
      they were treated with sterile filtrates of the fungus. The active substances
      were later identified as gibberellic acid.
          F. Skoog and his co-workers observed that from the internodal
      segments of tobacco stems the callus (a mass of undifferentiated cells)
      proliferated only if, in addition to auxins the nutrients medium was
      supplemented with one of the following: extracts of vascular tissues, yeast
      extract, coconut milk or DNA. Skoog and Miller, later identified and
      crystallised the cytokinesis promoting active substance that they termed
      kinetin.
          During mid-1960s, three independent researches reported the
      purification and chemical characterisation of three different kinds of
      inhibitors: inhibitor-B, abscission II and dormin. Later all the three were
      proved to be chemically identical. It was named abscisic acid (ABA).
          Cousins confirmed the release of a volatile substance from ripened
      oranges that hastened the ripening of stored unripened bananas. Later
      this volatile substance was identified as ethylene, a gaseous PGR.
          Let us study some of the physiological effects of these five categories
      of PGRs in the next section.

      15.4.3 Physiological Effects of Plant Growth Regulators
      15.4.3.1 Auxins
      Auxins (from Greek ‘auxein’ : to grow) was first isolated from human urine.
      The term ‘auxin’ is applied to the indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and to other
      natural and synthetic compounds having certain growth regulating
      properties. They are generally produced by the growing apices of the stems
      and roots, from where they migrate to the regions of their action. Auxins
      like IAA and indole butyric acid (IBA) have been isolated from plants.
      NAA (naphthalene acetic acid) and 2, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic)
      are synthetic auxins. All these auxins have been used extensively in
      agricultural and horticultural practices.
          They help to initiate rooting in stem cuttings, an application widely
      used for plant propagation. Auxins promote flowering e.g. in pineapples.
      They help to prevent fruit and leaf drop at early stages but promote the
      abscission of older mature leaves and fruits.
          In most higher plants, the growing apical bud inhibits the growth of
      the lateral (axillary) buds, a phenomenon called apical dominance.
      Removal of shoot tips (decapitation) usually results in the growth of lateral
      buds (Figure 15.11). It is widely applied in tea plantations, hedge-making.
      Can you explain why?
    PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                                  249


    Auxins also induce parthenocarpy, e.g., in
tomatoes. They are widely used as herbicides.
2, 4-D, widely used to kill dicotyledonous
weeds,      does     not     affect   mature
monocotyledonous plants. It is used to prepare
weed-free lawns by gardeners. Auxin also
controls xylem differentiation and helps in cell
division.
15.4.3.2 Gibberellins
Gibberellins are another kind of promotery
PGR. There are more than 100 gibberellins
reported from widely different organisms such              (a)                                     (b)
as fungi and higher plants. They are denoted Figure 15.11 Apical dominance in plants :
as GA 1, GA 2, GA 3 and so on. However,                              (a) A plant with apical bud intact
Gibberellic acid (GA3) was one of the first                          (b) A plant with apical bud removed
gibberellins to be discovered and remains the                        Note the growth of lateral buds into
most intensively studied form. All GAs are                           branches after decapitation.
acidic. They produce a wide range of
physiological responses in the plants. Their ability to cause an increase
in length of axis is used to increase the length of grapes stalks. Gibberellins,
cause fruits like apple to elongate and improve its shape. They also delay
senescence. Thus, the fruits can be left on the tree longer so as to extend
the market period. GA3 is used to speed up the malting process in brewing
industry.
     Sugarcane stores carbohydrate as sugar in their stems. Spraying
sugarcane crop with gibberellins increases the length of the stem, thus
increasing the yield by as much as 20 tonnes per acre.
     Spraying juvenile conifers with GAs hastens the maturity period, thus
leading to early seed production. Gibberellins also promotes bolting
(internode elongation just prior to flowering) in beet, cabbages and many
plants with rosette habit.
15.4.3.3 Cytokinins
Cytokinins have specific effects on cytokinesis, and were discovered as
kinetin (a modified form of adenine, a purine) from the autoclaved herring
sperm DNA. Kinetin does not occur naturally in plants. Search for natural
substances with cytokinin-like activities led to the isolation of zeatin from
corn-kernels and coconut milk. Since the discovery of zeatin, several
naturally occurring cytokinins, and some synthetic compounds with cell
division promoting activity, have been identified. Natural cytokinins are
synthesised in regions where rapid cell division occurs, for example, root
apices, developing shoot buds, young fruits etc. It helps to produce new
250                                                                        BIOLOGY


      leaves, chloroplasts in leaves, lateral shoot growth and adventitious shoot
      formation. Cytokinins help overcome the apical dominance. They promote
      nutrient mobilisation which helps in the delay of leaf senescence.
      15.4.3.4 Ethylene
      Ethylene is a simple gaseous PGR. It is synthesised in large amounts by
      tissues undergoing senescence and ripening fruits. Influences of ethylene
      on plants include horizontal growth of seedlings, swelling of the axis and
      apical hook formation in dicot seedlings. Ethylene promotes senescence
      and abscission of plant organs especially of leaves and flowers. Ethylene
      is highly effective in fruit ripening. It enhances the respiration rate during
      ripening of the fruits. This rise in rate of respiration is called respiratory
      climactic.
           Ethylene breaks seed and bud dormancy, initiates germination in
      peanut seeds, sprouting of potato tubers. Ethylene promotes rapid
      internode/petiole elongation in deep water rice plants. It helps leaves/
      upper parts of the shoot to remain above water. Ethylene also promotes
      root growth and root hair formation, thus helping the plants to increase
      their absorption surface.
           Ethylene is used to initiate flowering and for synchronising fruit-set
      in pineapples. It also induces flowering in mango. Since ethylene regulates
      so many physiological processes, it is one of the most widely used PGR in
      agriculture. The most widely used compound as source of ethylene is
      ethephon. Ethephon in an aqueous solution is readily absorbed and
      transported within the plant and releases ethylene slowly. Ethephon
      hastens fruit ripening in tomatoes and apples and accelerates abscission
      in flowers and fruits (thinning of cotton, cherry, walnut). It promotes female
      flowers in cucumbers thereby increasing the yield.
      15.4.3.5 Abscisic acid
      As mentioned earlier, abscisic acid (ABA) was discovered for its role in
      regulating abscission and dormancy. But like other PGRs, it also has
      other wide ranging effects on plant growth and development. It acts as a
      general plant growth inhibitor and an inhibitor of plant metabolism. ABA
      inhibits seed germination. ABA stimulates the closure of stomata in the
      epidermis and increases the tolerance of plants to various kinds of stresses.
      Therefore, it is also called the stress hormone. ABA plays an important
      role in seed development, maturation and dormancy. By inducing
      dormancy, ABA helps seeds to withstand desiccation and other factors
      unfavourable for growth. In most situations, ABA acts as an antagonist
      to GAs.
          We may summarise that for any and every phase of growth,
      differentiation and development of plants, one or the other PGR has some
      role to play. Such roles could be complimentary or antagonistic. These
      could be individualistic or synergistic.
    PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                                    251


    Similarly, there are a number of events in the life of a plant where
more than one PGR interact to affect that event, e.g., dormancy in seeds/
buds, abscission, senescence, apical dominance, etc.
    Remember, the role of PGR is of only one kind of intrinsic control.
Along with genomic control and extrinsic factors, they play an important
role in plant growth and development. Many of the extrinsic factors such
as temperature and light, control plant growth and development via PGR.
Some of such events could be: vernalisation, flowering, dormancy, seed
germination, plant movements, etc.
    We shall discuss briefly the role of light and temperature (both of them,
the extrinsic factors) on initiation of flowering.


15.5 PHOTOPERIODISM

It has been observed that some plants require a periodic exposure to
light to induce flowering. It is also seen that such plants are able to
measure the duration of exposure to light. For example, some plants
require the exposure to light for a period exceeding a well defined critical
duration, while others must be exposed to light for a period less than this
critical duration before the flowering is initiated in them. The former group
of plants are called long day plants while the latter ones are termed
short day plants. The critical duration is different for different plants.
There are many plants, however, where there is no such correlation
between exposure to light duration and induction of flowering response;
such plants are called day-neutral plants (Figure 15.12). It is now also




                          Long day plant           Short day plant              Day neutral plant


                Figure 15.12 Photoperiodism : Long day, short day and day neutral plants
252                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                      known that not only the duration of light period but that the duration of
                      dark period is also of equal importance. Hence, it can be said that flowering
                      in certain plants depends not only on a combination of light and dark
                      exposures but also their relative durations. This response of plants to
                      periods of day/night is termed photoperiodism. It is also interesting to
                      note that while shoot apices modify themselves into flowering apices prior
                      to flowering, they (i.e., shoot apices of plants) by themselves cannot percieve
                      photoperiods. The site of perception of light/dark duration are the leaves.
                      It has been hypothesised that there is a hormonal substance(s) that is
                      responsible for flowering. This hormonal substance migrates from leaves
                      to shoot apices for inducing flowering only when the plants are exposed
                      to the necessary inductive photoperiod.


                      15.6 VERNALISATION

                      There are plants for which flowering is either quantitatively or qualitatively
                      dependent on exposure to low temperature. This phenomenon is termed
                      vernalisation. It prevents precocious reproductive development late in
                      the growing season, and enables the plant to have sufficient time to reach
                      maturity. Vernalisation refers specially to the promotion of flowering by a
                      period of low temperature. Some important food plants, wheat, barley,
                      rye have two kinds of varieties: winter and spring varieties. The ‘spring’
                      variety are normally planted in the spring and come to flower and produce
                      grain before the end of the growing season. Winter varieties, however, if
                      planted in spring would normally fail to flower or produce mature grain
                      within a span of a flowering season. Hence, they are planted in autumn.
                      They germinate, and over winter come out as small seedlings, resume
                      growth in the spring, and are harvested usually around mid-summer.
                          Another example of vernalisation is seen in biennial plants. Biennials
                      are monocarpic plants that normally flower and die in the second season.
                      Sugarbeet, cabbages, carrots are some of the common biennials.
                      Subjecting the growing of a biennial plant to a cold treatment stimulates
                      a subsequent photoperiodic flowering response.



                                           SUMMARY

      Growth is one of the most conspicuous events in any living organism. It is an
      irreversible increase expressed in parameters such as size, area, length, height,
      volume, cell number etc. It conspicuously involves increased protoplasmic material.
      In plants, meristems are the sites of growth. Root and shoot apical meristems
      sometimes alongwith intercalary meristem, contribute to the elongation growth of
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                                  253


 plant axes. Growth is indeterminate in higher plants. Following cell division in root
 and shoot apical meristem cells, the growth could be arithmetic or geometrical.
 Growth may not be and generally is not sustained at a high rate throughout the
 life of cell/tissue/organ/organism. One can define three principle phases of growth
 – the lag, the log and the senescent phase. When a cell loses the capacity to divide,
 it leads to differentiation. Differentiation results in development of structures that
 is commensurate with the function the cells finally has to perform. General principles
 for differentiation for cell, tissues and organs are similar. A differentiated cell may
 dedifferentiate and then redifferentiate. Since differentiation in plants is open, the
 development could also be flexible, i.e., the development is the sum of growth and
 differentiation. Plant exhibit plasticity in development.
      Plant growth and development are under the control of both intrinsic and
 extrinsic factors. Intercellular intrinsic factors are the chemical substances, called
 plant growth regulators (PGR). There are diverse groups of PGRs in plants,
 principally belonging to five groups: auxins, gibberellins, cytokinins, abscisic acid
 and ethylene. These PGRs are synthesised in various parts of the plant; they control
 different differentiation and developmental events. Any PGR has diverse
 physiological effects on plants. Diverse PGRs also manifest similar effects. PGRs
 may act synergistically or antagonistically. Plant growth and development is also
 affected by light, temperature, nutrition, oxygen status, gravity and such external
 factors.
      Flowering in some plants is induced only when exposed to certain duration of
 photoperiod. Depending on the nature of photoperiod requirements, the plants
 are called short day plants, long day plants and day-neutral plants. Certain plants
 also need to be exposed to low temperature so as to hasten flowering later in life.
 This treatement is known as vernalisation.



                                         EXERCISES

  1.   Define growth, differentiation, development, dedifferentiation, redifferentiation,
       determinate growth, meristem and growth rate.
  2.   Why is not any one parameter good enough to demonstrate growth throughout
       the life of a flowering plant?
  3.   Describe briefly:
       (a) Arithmetic growth
       (b) Geometric growth
       (c) Sigmoid growth curve
       (d) Absolute and relative growth rates
  4.   List five main groups of natural plant growth regulators. Write a note on discovery,
       physiological functions and agricultural/horticultural applications of any one
       of them.
254                                                                                       BIOLOGY


       5.   What do you understand by photoperiodism and vernalisation? Describe their
            significance.
       6.   Why is abscisic acid also known as stress hormone?
       7.   ‘Both growth and differentiation in higher plants are open’. Comment.
       8.   ‘Both a short day plant and a long day plant can produce can flower
            simultaneously in a given place’. Explain.
       9.   Which one of the plant growth regulators would you use if you are asked to:
            (a) induce rooting in a twig
            (b) quickly ripen a fruit
            (c) delay leaf senescence
            (d) induce growth in axillary buds
            (e) ‘bolt’ a rosette plant
            (f) induce immediate stomatal closure in leaves.
      10.   Would a defoliated plant respond to photoperiodic cycle? Why?
      11.   What would be expected to happen if:
            (a) GA3 is applied to rice seedlings
            (b) dividing cells stop differentiating
            (c) a rotten fruit gets mixed with unripe fruits
            (d) you forget to add cytokinin to the culture medium.
 302                                                                                    BIOLOGY




                           CHAPTER 20
                           LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
20.1 Types of          Movement is one of the significant features of living beings. Animals and
     Movement          plants exhibit a wide range of movements. Streaming of protoplasm in
                       the unicellular organisms like Amoeba is a simple form of movement.
20.2 Muscle
                       Movement of cilia, flagella and tentacles are shown by many organisms.
20.3 Skeletal System   Human beings can move limbs, jaws, eyelids, tongue, etc. Some of the
20.4 Joints            movements result in a change of place or location. Such voluntary
                       movements are called locomotion. Walking, running, climbing, flying,
20.5 Disorders of
                       swimming are all some forms of locomotory movements. Locomotory
     Muscular and
                       structures need not be different from those affecting other types of
     Skeletal System
                       movements. For example, in Paramoecium, cilia helps in the movement of
                       food through cytopharynx and in locomotion as well. Hydra can use its
                       tentacles for capturing its prey and also use them for locomotion. We use
                       limbs for changes in body postures and locomotion as well. The above
                       observations suggest that movements and locomotion cannot be studied
                       separately. The two may be linked by stating that all locomotions are
                       movements but all movements are not locomotions.
                           Methods of locomotion performed by animals vary with their habitats
                       and the demand of the situation. However, locomotion is generally for
                       search of food, shelter, mate, suitable breeding grounds, favourable
                       climatic conditions or to escape from enemies/predators.


                       20.1 TYPES OF MOVEMENT
                       Cells of the human body exhibit three main types of movements, namely,
                       amoeboid, ciliary and muscular.
     LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                         303


    Some specialised cells in our body like macrophages and leucocytes
in blood exhibit amoeboid movement. It is effected by pseudopodia formed
by the streaming of protoplasm (as in Amoeba). Cytoskeletal elements
like microfilaments are also involved in amoeboid movement.
    Ciliary movement occurs in most of our internal tubular organs which
are lined by ciliated epithelium. The coordinated movements of cilia in
the trachea help us in removing dust particles and some of the foreign
substances inhaled alongwith the atmospheric air. Passage of ova through
the female reproductive tract is also facilitated by the ciliary movement.
    Movement of our limbs, jaws, tongue, etc, require muscular movement.
The contractile property of muscles are effectively used for locomotion
and other movements by human beings and majority of multicellular
organisms. Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular,
skeletal and neural systems. In this chapter, you will learn about the
types of muscles, their structure, mechanism of their contraction and
important aspects of the skeletal system.


20.2 MUSCLE

Muscle is a specialised tissue of mesodermal origin. About 40-50 per
cent of the body weight of a human adult is contributed by muscles.
They have special properties like excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity. Muscles have been classified using different criteria, namely
location, appearance and nature of regulation of their activities. Based on
their location, three types of muscles are identified : (i) Skeletal (ii) Visceral
and (iii) Cardiac.
    Skeletal muscles are closely associated with the skeletal components
of the body. They have a striped appearance under the microscope and
hence are called striated muscles. As their activities are under the
voluntary control of the nervous system, they are known as voluntary
muscles too. They are primarily involved in locomotory actions and
changes of body postures.
    Visceral muscles are located in the inner walls of hollow visceral
organs of the body like the alimentary canal, reproductive tract, etc. They
do not exhibit any striation and are smooth in appearance. Hence, they
are called smooth muscles (nonstriated muscle). Their activities are
not under the voluntary control of the nervous system and are therefore
known as involuntary muscles. They assist, for example, in the
transportation of food through the digestive tract and gametes through
the genital tract.
    As the name suggests, Cardiac muscles are the muscles of heart.
Many cardiac muscle cells assemble in a branching pattern to form a
304                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                      cardiac muscle. Based on appearance, cardiac muscles are striated. They
                      are involuntary in nature as the nervous system does not control their
                      activities directly.
                          Let us examine a skeletal muscle in detail to understand the structure
                      and mechanism of contraction. Each organised skeletal muscle in our
                      body is made of a number of muscle bundles or fascicles held together
                      by a common collagenous connective tissue layer called fascia. Each
                      muscle bundle contains a number of muscle fibres (Figure 20.1). Each




                                                                    Fascicle
                                                                    (muscle bundle)




              Muscle fibre
              (muscle cell)

              Sarcolemma

            Blood capillary




      Figure 20.1 Diagrammatic cross sectional view of a muscle showing muscle bundles
                  and muscle fibres


                      muscle fibre is lined by the plasma membrane called sarcolemma
                      enclosing the sarcoplasm. Muscle fibre is a syncitium as the sarcoplasm
                      contains many nuclei. The endoplasmic reticulum, i.e., sarcoplasmic
                      reticulum of the muscle fibres is the store house of calcium ions. A
                      characteristic feature of the muscle fibre is the presence of a large number
                      of parallelly arranged filaments in the sarcoplasm called myofilaments or
                      myofibrils. Each myofibril has alternate dark and light bands on it. A
                      detailed study of the myofibril has established that the striated appearance
                      is due to the distribution pattern of two important proteins – Actin and
                      Myosin. The light bands contain actin and is called I-band or Isotropic
                      band, whereas the dark band called ‘A’ or Anisotropic band contains
     LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                                305


myosin. Both the proteins are arranged as rod-like structures, parallel to
each other and also to the longitudinal axis of the myofibrils. Actin
filaments are thinner as compared to the myosin filaments, hence are
commonly called thin and thick filaments respectively. In the centre of
each ‘I’ band is an elastic fibre called ‘Z’ line which bisects it. The thin
filaments are firmly attached to the ‘Z’ line. The thick filaments in the
‘A’ band are also held together in the middle of this band by a thin fibrous
membrane called ‘M’ line. The ‘A’ and ‘I’ bands are arranged alternately
throughout the length of the myofibrils. The portion of the myofibril
between two successive ‘Z’ lines is considered as the functional unit of
contraction and is called a sarcomere (Figure 20.2). In a resting state, the
edges of thin filaments on either side of the thick filaments partially overlap
the free ends of the thick filaments leaving the central part of the thick
filaments. This central part of thick filament, not overlapped by thin
filaments is called the ‘H’ zone.




                                                    (a)




                                                     (b)

         Figure 20.2 Diagrammatic representation of (a) anatomy of a muscle fibre showing
                     a sarcomere (b) a sarcomere
306                                                                                BIOLOGY


                 20.2.1 Structure of Contractile Proteins
                 Each actin (thin) filament is made of two ‘F’ (filamentous) actins
                 helically wound to each other. Each ‘F’ actin is a polymer of monomeric
                 ‘G’ (Globular) actins. Two filaments of another protein, tropomyosin
                 also run close to the ‘F’ actins throughout its length. A complex protein
                 Troponin is distributed at regular intervals on the tropomyosin. In the
                 resting state a subunit of troponin masks the active binding sites for
                 myosin on the actin filaments (Figure 20.3a).
                     Each myosin (thick) filament is also a polymerised protein. Many
                 monomeric proteins called Meromyosins (Figure 20.3b) constitute one
                 thick filament. Each meromyosin has two important parts, a globular
                 head with a short arm and a tail, the former being called the heavy
                 meromyosin (HMM) and the latter, the light meromyosin (LMM). The HMM
                 component, i.e.; the head and short arm projects outwards at regular
                 distance and angle from each other from the surface of a polymerised myosin
                 filament and is known as cross arm. The globular head is an active ATPase
                 enzyme and has binding sites for ATP and active sites for actin.




                                   (a)



                      Actin binding sites
                                                          Head
                        ATP binding sites


                                                         Cross arm



                                   (b)

      Figure 20.3 (a) An actin (thin) filament (b) Myosin monomer (Meromyosin)


                 20.2.2 Mechanism of Muscle Contraction
                 Mechanism of muscle contraction is best explained by the sliding filament
                 theory which states that contraction of a muscle fibre takes place by the
                 sliding of the thin filaments over the thick filaments.
     LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                             307


    Muscle contraction is initiated by a signal sent by the central nervous
system (CNS) via a motor neuron. A motor neuron alongwith the muscle
fibres connected to it constitute a motor unit. The junction between a
motor neuron and the sarcolemma of the muscle fibre is called the
neuromuscular junction or motor-end plate. A neural signal reaching
this junction releases a neurotransmitter (Acetyl choline) which generates
an action potential in the sarcolemma. This spreads through the muscle
fibre and causes the release of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. Increase
in Ca++ level leads to the binding of calcium with a subunit of troponin on
actin filaments and thereby remove the masking of active sites for myosin.
Utilising the energy from ATP hydrolysis, the myosin head now binds to
the exposed active sites on actin to form a cross bridge (Figure 20.4). This




        Figure 20.4 Stages in cross bridge formation, rotation of head and breaking of
                    cross bridge


pulls the attached actin filaments towards the centre of ‘A’ band. The
‘Z’ line attached to these actins are also pulled inwards thereby causing a
shortening of the sarcomere, i.e., contraction. It is clear from the above
steps, that during shortening of the muscle, i.e., contraction, the ‘I’ bands
get reduced, whereas the ‘A’ bands retain the length (Figure 20.5). The
myosin, releasing the ADP and P1 goes back to its relaxed state. A new
ATP binds and the cross-bridge is broken (Figure 20.4). The ATP is again
hydrolysed by the myosin head and the cycle of cross bridge formation
308                                                                                     BIOLOGY




      Figure 20.5 Sliding-filament theory of muscle contraction (movement of the thin
                  filaments and the relative size of the I band and H zones)


                    and breakage is repeated causing further sliding. The process continues
                    till the Ca++ ions are pumped back to the sarcoplasmic cisternae resulting
                    in the masking of actin filaments. This causes the return of ‘Z’ lines back
                    to their original position, i.e., relaxation. The reaction time of the fibres
                    can vary in different muscles. Repeated activation of the muscles can lead
                    to the accumulation of lactic acid due to anaerobic breakdown of glycogen
                    in them, causing fatigue. Muscle contains a red coloured oxygen storing
                    pigment called myoglobin. Myoglobin content is high in some of the
                    muscles which gives a reddish appearance. Such muscles are called the
                    Red fibres. These muscles also contain plenty of mitochondria which can
                    utilise the large amount of oxygen stored in them for ATP production.
                    These muscles, therefore, can also be called aerobic muscles. On the
                    other hand, some of the muscles possess very less quantity of myoglobin
                    and therefore, appear pale or whitish. These are the White fibres. Number
                    of mitochondria are also few in them, but the amount of sarcoplasmic
                    reticulum is high. They depend on anaerobic process for energy.
     LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                               309


20.3 SKELETAL SYSTEM

Skeletal system consists of a framework of bones and a few cartilages.
This system has a significant role in movement shown by the body.
Imagine chewing food without jaw bones and walking around without
the limb bones. Bone and cartilage are specialised connective tissues.
The former has a very hard matrix due to calcium salts in it and the latter
has slightly pliable matrix due to chondroitin salts. In human beings,
this system is made up of 206 bones and a few cartilages. It is grouped
into two principal divisions – the axial and the appendicular skeleton.
    Axial skeleton comprises 80 bones distributed along the main axis
of the body. The skull, vertebral column, sternum and ribs constitute
axial skeleton. The skull (Figure 20.6) is composed of two sets of bones –

                                               Frontal bone



             Parietal
             bone                                                 Sphenoid bone

                                                                  Ethmoid bone
                                                                     Lacrimal bone
                                                                       Nasal bone
            Temporal
            bone
                                                                          Zygomatic bone

            Occipital
            bone                                                         Maxilla

          Occipital
          condyle
                                                                         Mandible


                                                                  Hyoid bone

                         Figure 20.6 Diagrammatic view of human skull


cranial and facial, that totals to 22 bones. Cranial bones are 8 in number.
They form the hard protective outer covering, cranium for the brain. The
facial region is made up of 14 skeletal elements which form the front part
of the skull. A single U-shaped bone called hyoid is present at the base of
the buccal cavity and it is also included in the skull. Each middle ear
contains three tiny bones – Malleus, Incus and Stapes, collectively called
Ear Ossicles. The skull region articulates with the superior region of the
 310                                                                                           BIOLOGY



                                Cervical vertebra   vertebral column with the help of two occipital
                                                    condyles (dicondylic skull).
                                                         Our vertebral column (Figure 20.7) is
                                                    formed by 26 serially arranged units called
                                                    vertebrae and is dorsally placed. It extends from
                                                    the base of the skull and constitutes the main
                                  Thoracic          framework of the trunk. Each vertebra has a
                                  vertebra
                                                    central hollow portion (neural canal) through
                                                    which the spinal cord passes. First vertebra is
                                                    the atlas and it articulates with the occipital
                                                    condyles. The vertebral column is differentiated
Intervertebral                    Lumbar            into cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral
          disc                    vertebra          (1-fused) and coccygeal (1-fused) regions
                                                    starting from the skull. The number of cervical
    Sacrum                                          vertebrae are seven in almost all mammals
                                                    including human beings. The vertebral column
       Coccyx                                       protects the spinal cord, supports the head and
                                                    serves as the point of attachment for the ribs
Figure 20.7 Vertebral column (right lateral view)   and musculature of the back. Sternum is a
                                                    flat bone on the ventral midline of thorax.
                                                         There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each rib is a
                                                    thin flat bone connected dorsally to the
                                                    vertebral column and ventrally to the sternum.
                                                    It has two articulation surfaces on its dorsal
                                                    end and is hence called bicephalic. First seven
                                                    pairs of ribs are called true ribs. Dorsally, they
                                                    are attached to the thoracic vertebrae and
                                                    ventrally connected to the sternum with the
                                                    help of hyaline cartilage. The 8th, 9th and 10th
                                                    pairs of ribs do not articulate directly with the
                                                    sternum but join the seventh rib with the help
                                                    of hyaline cartilage. These are called
                                                    vertebrochondral (false) ribs. Last 2 pairs (11th
                                                    and 12th) of ribs are not connected ventrally
                                                    and are therefore, called floating ribs. Thoracic
                                                    vertebrae, ribs and sternum together form the
                                                    rib cage (Figure 20.8).
                                                         The bones of the limbs alongwith their
                                                    girdles constitute the appendicular skeleton.
                                                    Each limb is made of 30 bones. The bones of
             Figure 20.8 Ribs and rib cage          the hand (fore limb) are humerus, radius and
     LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                                 311


ulna, carpals (wrist bones – 8 in number),
metacarpals (palm bones – 5 in number) and
phalanges (digits – 14 in number) (Figure
20.9). Femur (thigh bone – the longest bone),
tibia and fibula, tarsals (ankle bones – 7 in
number), metatarsals (5 in number) and
phalanges (digits – 14 in number) are the
bones of the legs (hind limb) (Figure 20.10). A
cup shaped bone called patella cover the knee
ventrally (knee cap).
     Pectoral and Pelvic girdle bones help in
the articulation of the upper and the lower limbs
respectively with the axial skeleton. Each
girdle is formed of two halves. Each half of
pectoral girdle consists of a clavicle and a
scapula (Figure 20.9). Scapula is a large
triangular flat bone situated in the dorsal part
of the thorax between the second and the
seventh ribs. The dorsal, flat, triangular body
of scapula has a slightly elevated ridge called
                                                     Figure 20.9 Right pectoral girdle and upper
the spine which projects as a flat, expanded                     arm. (frontal view)
process called the acromion. The clavicle
articulates with this. Below the acromion is a
depression called the glenoid cavity which
articulates with the head of the humerus to
form the shoulder joint. Each clavicle is a long
slender bone with two curvatures. This bone
is commonly called the collar bone.
     Pelvic girdle consists of two coxal bones
(Figure 20.10). Each coxal bone is formed by
the fusion of three bones – ilium, ischium and
pubis. At the point of fusion of the above bones
is a cavity called acetabulum to which the thigh
bone articulates. The two halves of the pelvic
girdle meet ventrally to form the pubic
symphysis containing fibrous cartilage.


20.4 JOINTS

Joints are essential for all types of movements
involving the bony parts of the body.               Figure 20.10 Right pelvic girdle and lower limb
Locomotory movements are no exception to                         bones (frontal view)
312                                                                                          BIOLOGY


                      this. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones and
                      cartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movement
                      through joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at these
                      joints vary depending on different factors. Joints have been classified into
                      three major structural forms, namely, fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial.
                          Fibrous joints do not allow any movement. This type of joint is shown
                      by the flat skull bones which fuse end-to-end with the help of dense fibrous
                      connective tissues in the form of sutures, to form the cranium.
                          In cartilaginous joints, the bones involved are joined together with
                      the help of cartilages. The joint between the adjacent vertebrae in the
                      vertebral column is of this pattern and it permits limited movements.
                          Synovial joints are characterised by the presence of a fluid filled synovial
                      cavity between the articulating surfaces of the two bones. Such an arragement
                      allows considerable movement. These joints help in locomotion and many
                      other movements. Ball and socket joint (between humerus and pectoral
                      girdle), hinge joint (knee joint), pivot joint (between atlas and axis), gliding
                      joint (between the carpals) and saddle joint (between carpal and metacarpal
                      of thumb) are some examples.


                      20.5 DISORDERS OF MUSCULAR AND SKELETAL SYSTEM

                      Myasthenia gravis: Auto immune disorder affecting neuromuscular
                      junction leading to fatigue, weakening and paralysis of skeletal muscle.
                      Muscular dystrophy: Progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle mostly
                      due to genetic disorder.
                      Tetany: Rapid spasms (wild contractions) in muscle due to low Ca++ in
                      body fluid.
                      Arthritis: Inflammation of joints.
                      Osteoporosis: Age-related disorder characterised by decreased bone mass
                      and increased chances of fractures. Decreased levels of estrogen is a
                      common cause.
                      Gout: Inflammation of joints due to accumulation of uric acid crystals.




                                           SUMMARY

      Movement is an essential feature of all living beings. Protoplasmic streaming, ciliary
      movements, movements of fins, limbs, wings, etc., are some forms exhibited by
      animals. A voluntary movement which causes the animal to change its place, is
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT                                                                    313


  called locomotion. Animals move generally in search of food, shelter, mate, breeding
  ground, better climate or to protect themselves.
       The cells of the human body exhibit amoeboid, ciliary and muscular
  movements. Locomotion and many other movements require coordinated muscular
  activities. Three types of muscles are present in our body. Skeletal muscles are
  attached to skeletal elements. They appear striated and are voluntary in nature.
  Visceral muscles, present in the inner walls of visceral organs are nonstriated and
  involuntary. Cardiac muscles are the muscles of the heart. They are striated,
  branched and involuntary. Muscles possess excitability, contractility, extensibility
  and elasticity.
       Muscle fibre is the anatomical unit of muscle. Each muscle fibre has many
  parallelly arranged myofibrils. Each myofibril contains many serially arranged
  units called sarcomere which are the functional units. Each sarcomere has a central
  ‘A’ band made of thick myosin filaments, and two half ‘I’ bands made of thin actin
  filaments on either side of it marked by ‘Z’ lines. Actin and myosin are polymerised
  proteins with contractility. The active sites for myosin on resting actin filament are
  masked by a protein-troponin. Myosin head contains ATPase and has ATP binding
  sites and active sites for actin. A motor neuron carries signal to the muscle fibre
  which generates an action potential in it. This causes the release of Ca++ from
  sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca++ activates actin which binds to the myosin head to
  form a cross bridge. These cross bridges pull the actin filaments causing them to
  slide over the myosin filaments and thereby causing contraction. Ca++ are then
  returned to sarcoplasmic reticulum which inactivate the actin. Cross bridges are
  broken and the muscles relax.
       Repeated stimulation of muscles leads to fatigue. Muscles are classified as
  Red and White fibres based primarily on the amount of red coloured myoglobin
  pigment in them.
       Bones and cartilages constitute our skeletal system. The skeletal system is
  divisible into axial and appendicular. Skull, vertebral column, ribs and sternum
  constitute the axial skeleton. Limb bones and girdles form the appendicular
  skeleton. Three types of joints are formed between bones or between bone and
  cartilage – fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial. Synovial joints allow considerable
  movements and therefore, play a significant role in locomotion.



                                        EXERCISES

   1. Draw the diagram of a sarcomere of skeletal muscle showing different regions.
   2. Define sliding filament theory of muscle contraction.
   3. Describe the important steps in muscle contraction.
314                                                                                            BIOLOGY


       4. Write true or false. If false change the statement so that it is true.
          (a) Actin is present in thin filament
          (b) H-zone of striated muscle fibre represents both thick and thin filaments.
          (c) Human skeleton has 206 bones.
          (d) There are 11 pairs of ribs in man.
          (e) Sternum is present on the ventral side of the body.
       5. Write the difference between :
          (a) Actin and Myosin
          (b) Red and White muscles
          (c) Pectoral and Pelvic girdle
       6. Match Column I with Column II :
           Column I                        Column II
          (a)   Smooth muscle                (i)   Myoglobin
          (b)   Tropomyosin                 (ii)   Thin filament
          (c)   Red muscle                 (iii)   Sutures
          (d)   Skull                      (iv)    Involuntary
       7. What are the different types of movements exhibited by the cells of human
          body?
       8. How do you distinguish between a skeletal muscle and a cardiac muscle?
       9. Name the type of joint between the following:-
          (a) atlas/axis
          (b) carpal/metacarpal of thumb
          (c) between phalanges
          (d) femur/acetabulum
          (e) between cranial bones
          (f) between pubic bones in the pelvic girdle
      10. Fill in the blank spaces:
          (a) All mammals (except a few) have __________ cervical vertebra.
          (b) The number of phalanges in each limb of human is __________
          (c) Thin filament of myofibril contains 2 ‘F’ actins and two other proteins namely
              __________ and __________.
          (d) In a muscle fibre Ca++ is stored in __________
          (e) __________ and __________ pairs of ribs are called floating ribs.
          (f) The human cranium is made of __________ bones.
                            UNIT 1
                            DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD

Chapter 1                   Biology is the science of life forms and living processes. The living world
The Living World            comprises an amazing diversity of living organisms. Early man could
                            easily perceive the difference between inanimate matter and living
Chapter 2                   organisms. Early man deified some of the inanimate matter (wind, sea,
Biological Classification   fire etc.) and some among the animals and plants. A common feature of
                            all such forms of inanimate and animate objects was the sense of awe
Chapter 3                   or fear that they evoked. The description of living organisms including
Plant Kingdom               human beings began much later in human history. Societies which
                            indulged in anthropocentric view of biology could register limited
Chapter 4                   progress in biological knowledge. Systematic and monumental
Animal Kingdom              description of life forms brought in, out of necessity, detailed systems
                            of identification, nomenclature and classification. The biggest spin off
                            of such studies was the recognition of the sharing of similarities among
                            living organisms both horizontally and vertically. That all present day
                            living organisms are related to each other and also to all organisms
                            that ever lived on this earth, was a revelation which humbled man and
                            led to cultural movements for conservation of biodiversity. In the
                            following chapters of this unit, you will get a description, including
                            classification, of animals and plants from a taxonomist’s perspective.
                Born on 5 July 1904, in Kempten, Germany, ERNST MAYR, the
                Harvard University evolutionary biologist who has been called
                ‘The Darwin of the 20th century’, was one of the 100 greatest
                scientists of all time. Mayr joined Harvard’s Faculty of Arts
                and Sciences in 1953 and retired in 1975, assuming the title
                Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology Emeritus. Throughout
                his nearly 80-year career, his research spanned ornithology,
                taxonomy, zoogeography, evolution, systematics, and the
                history and philosophy of biology. He almost single-handedly
                made the origin of species diversity the central question of
                evolutionary biology that it is today. He also pioneered the
                currently accepted definition of a biological species. Mayr was
                awarded the three prizes widely regarded as the triple crown of
                biology: the Balzan Prize in 1983, the International Prize for
                Biology in 1994, and the Crafoord Prize in 1999. Mayr died at
                the age of 100 in the year 2004.
 Ernst Mayr
(1904 – 2004)
                            CHAPTER 1
                            THE LIVING WORLD
1.1 What is ‘Living’?   How wonderful is the living world ! The wide range of living types is
                        amazing. The extraordinary habitats in which we find living organisms,
1.2 Diversity in the
                        be it cold mountains, deciduous forests, oceans, fresh water lakes, deserts
    Living World
                        or hot springs, leave us speechless. The beauty of a galloping horse, of
1.3 Taxonomic           the migrating birds, the valley of flowers or the attacking shark evokes
    Categories          awe and a deep sense of wonder. The ecological conflict and cooperation
1.4 Taxonomical         among members of a population and among populations of a community
    Aids                or even the molecular traffic inside a cell make us deeply reflect on – what
                        indeed is life? This question has two implicit questions within it. The first
                        is a technical one and seeks answer to what living is as opposed to the
                        non-living, and the second is a philosophical one, and seeks answer to
                        what the purpose of life is. As scientists, we shall not attempt answering
                        the second question. We will try to reflect on – what is living?


                        1.1 WHAT IS ‘LIVING’?

                        When we try to define ‘living’, we conventionally look for distinctive
                        characteristics exhibited by living organisms. Growth, reproduction, ability
                        to sense environment and mount a suitable response come to our mind
                        immediately as unique features of living organisms. One can add a few
                        more features like metabolism, ability to self-replicate, self-organise,
                        interact and emergence to this list. Let us try to understand each of these.
                             All living organisms grow. Increase in mass and increase in number
                        of individuals are twin characteristics of growth. A multicellular organism
4                                                                       BIOLOGY


    grows by cell division. In plants, this growth by cell division occurs
    continuously throughout their life span. In animals, this growth is seen
    only up to a certain age. However, cell division occurs in certain tissues to
    replace lost cells. Unicellular organisms grow by cell division. One can
    easily observe this in in vitro cultures by simply counting the number of
    cells under the microscope. In majority of higher animals and plants,
    growth and reproduction are mutually exclusive events. One must
    remember that increase in body mass is considered as growth. Non-living
    objects also grow if we take increase in body mass as a criterion for growth.
    Mountains, boulders and sand mounds do grow. However, this kind of
    growth exhibited by non-living objects is by accumulation of material on
    the surface. In living organisms, growth is from inside. Growth, therefore,
    cannot be taken as a defining property of living organisms. Conditions
    under which it can be observed in all living organisms have to be explained
    and then we understand that it is a characteristic of living systems. A
    dead organism does not grow.
        Reproduction, likewise, is a characteristic of living organisms.
    In multicellular organisms, reproduction refers to the production of
    progeny possessing features more or less similar to those of parents.
    Invariably and implicitly we refer to sexual reproduction. Organisms
    reproduce by asexual means also. Fungi multiply and spread easily due
    to the millions of asexual spores they produce. In lower organisms like
    yeast and hydra, we observe budding. In Planaria (flat worms), we observe
    true regeneration, i.e., a fragmented organism regenerates the lost part of
    its body and becomes, a new organism. The fungi, the filamentous algae,
    the protonema of mosses, all easily multiply by fragmentation. When it
    comes to unicellular organisms like bacteria, unicellular algae or Amoeba,
    reproduction is synonymous with growth, i.e., increase in number of cells.
    We have already defined growth as equivalent to increase in cell number
    or mass. Hence, we notice that in single-celled organisms, we are not very
    clear about the usage of these two terms – growth and reproduction.
    Further, there are many organisms which do not reproduce (mules, sterile
    worker bees, infertile human couples, etc). Hence, reproduction also cannot
    be an all-inclusive defining characteristic of living organisms. Of course,
    no non-living object is capable of reproducing or replicating by itself.
        Another characteristic of life is metabolism. All living organisms
    are made of chemicals. These chemicals, small and big, belonging to
    various classes, sizes, functions, etc., are constantly being made and
    changed into some other biomolecules. These conversions are chemical
    reactions or metabolic reactions. There are thousands of metabolic
    reactions occurring simultaneously inside all living organisms, be they
     THE LIVING WORLD                                                             5


unicellular or multicellular. All plants, animals, fungi and microbes exhibit
metabolism. The sum total of all the chemical reactions occurring in our
body is metabolism. No non-living object exhibits metabolism. Metabolic
reactions can be demonstrated outside the body in cell-free systems. An
isolated metabolic reaction(s) outside the body of an organism, performed
in a test tube is neither living nor non-living. Hence, while metabolism is
a defining feature of all living organisms without exception, isolated
metabolic reactions in vitro are not living things but surely living reactions.
Hence, cellular organisation of the body is the defining feature of
life forms.
     Perhaps, the most obvious and technically complicated feature of all
living organisms is this ability to sense their surroundings or environment
and respond to these environmental stimuli which could be physical,
chemical or biological. We sense our environment through our sense
organs. Plants respond to external factors like light, water, temperature,
other organisms, pollutants, etc. All organisms, from the prokaryotes to
the most complex eukaryotes can sense and respond to environmental
cues. Photoperiod affects reproduction in seasonal breeders, both plants
and animals. All organisms handle chemicals entering their bodies. All
organisms therefore, are ‘aware’ of their surroundings. Human being is
the only organism who is aware of himself, i.e., has self-consciousness.
Consciousness therefore, becomes the defining property of living
organisms.
     When it comes to human beings, it is all the more difficult to define
the living state. We observe patients lying in coma in hospitals virtually
supported by machines which replace heart and lungs. The patient is
otherwise brain-dead. The patient has no self-consciousness. Are such
patients who never come back to normal life, living or non-living?
     In higher classes, you will come to know that all living phenomena
are due to underlying interactions. Properties of tissues are not present
in the constituent cells but arise as a result of interactions among the
constituent cells. Similarly, properties of cellular organelles are not present
in the molecular constituents of the organelle but arise as a result of
interactions among the molecular components comprising the organelle.
These interactions result in emergent properties at a higher level of
organisation. This phenomenon is true in the hierarchy of organisational
complexity at all levels. Therefore, we can say that living organisms are
self-replicating, evolving and self-regulating interactive systems capable
of responding to external stimuli. Biology is the story of life on earth.
Biology is the story of evolution of living organisms on earth. All living
organisms – present, past and future, are linked to one another by the
sharing of the common genetic material, but to varying degrees.
6                                                                       BIOLOGY


    1.2 DIVERSITY       IN THE   LIVING WORLD

    If you look around you will see a large variety of living organisms, be it
    potted plants, insects, birds, your pets or other animals and plants. There
    are also several organisms that you cannot see with your naked eye but
    they are all around you. If you were to increase the area that you make
    observations in, the range and variety of organisms that you see would
    increase. Obviously, if you were to visit a dense forest, you would probably
    see a much greater number and kinds of living organisms in it. Each
    different kind of plant, animal or organism that you see, represents a
    species. The number of species that are known and described range
    between 1.7-1.8 million. This refers to biodiversity or the number and
    types of organisms present on earth. We should remember here that as
    we explore new areas, and even old ones, new organisms are continuously
    being identified.
        As stated earlier, there are millions of plants and animals in the world;
    we know the plants and animals in our own area by their local names.
    These local names would vary from place to place, even within a country.
    Probably you would recognise the confusion that would be created if we
    did not find ways and means to talk to each other, to refer to organisms
    we are talking about.
        Hence, there is a need to standardise the naming of living organisms
    such that a particular organism is known by the same name all over the
    world. This process is called nomenclature. Obviously, nomenclature or
    naming is only possible when the organism is described correctly and we
    know to what organism the name is attached to. This is identification.
        In order to facilitate the study, number of scientists have established
    procedures to assign a scientific name to each known organism. This is
    acceptable to biologists all over the world. For plants, scientific names are
    based on agreed principles and criteria, which are provided in International
    Code for Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN). You may ask, how are animals
    named? Animal taxonomists have evolved International Code of Zoological
    Nomenclature (ICZN). The scientific names ensure that each organism
    has only one name. Description of any organism should enable the people
    (in any part of the world) to arrive at the same name. They also ensure
    that such a name has not been used for any other known organism.
        Biologists follow universally accepted principles to provide scientific
    names to known organisms. Each name has two components – the
    Generic name and the specific epithet. This system of providing a name
    with two components is called Binomial nomenclature. This naming
    system given by Carolus Linnaeus is being practised by biologists all
    over the world. This naming system using a two word format was found
    convenient. Let us take the example of mango to understand the way of
     THE LIVING WORLD                                                            7


providing scientific names better. The scientific name of mango is written
as Mangifera indica. Let us see how it is a binomial name. In this name
Mangifera represents the genus while indica, is a particular species, or a
specific epithet. Other universal rules of nomenclature are as follows:
     1.   Biological names are generally in Latin and written in italics.
          They are Latinised or derived from Latin irrespective of their
          origin.
     2.   The first word in a biological name represents the genus while
          the second component denotes the specific epithet.
     3.   Both the words in a biological name, when handwritten, are
          separately underlined, or printed in italics to indicate their Latin
          origin.
     4.   The first word denoting the genus starts with a capital letter
          while the specific epithet starts with a small letter. It can be
          illustrated with the example of Mangifera indica.
    Name of the author appears after the specific epithet, i.e., at the end of
the biological name and is written in an abbreviated form, e.g., Mangifera
indica Linn. It indicates that this species was first described by Linnaeus.
    Since it is nearly impossible to study all the living organisms, it is
necessary to devise some means to make this possible. This process is
classification. Classification is the process by which anything is grouped
into convenient categories based on some easily observable characters.
For example, we easily recognise groups such as plants or animals or
dogs, cats or insects. The moment we use any of these terms, we associate
certain characters with the organism in that group. What image do you
see when you think of a dog ? Obviously, each one of us will see ‘dogs’
and not ‘cats’. Now, if we were to think of ‘Alsatians’ we know what we are
talking about. Similarly, suppose we were to say ‘mammals’, you would,
of course, think of animals with external ears and body hair. Likewise, in
plants, if we try to talk of ‘Wheat’, the picture in each of our minds will be
of wheat plants, not of rice or any other plant. Hence, all these - ‘Dogs’,
‘Cats’, ‘Mammals’, ‘Wheat’, ‘Rice’, ‘Plants’, ‘Animals’, etc., are convenient
categories we use to study organisms. The scientific term for these
categories is taxa. Here you must recognise that taxa can indicate
categories at very different levels. ‘Plants’ – also form a taxa. ‘Wheat’ is
also a taxa. Similarly, ‘animals’, ‘mammals’, ‘dogs’ are all taxa – but you
know that a dog is a mammal and mammals are animals. Therefore,
‘animals’, ‘mammals’ and ‘dogs’ represent taxa at different levels.
    Hence, based on characteristics, all living organisms can be classified
into different taxa. This process of classification is taxonomy. External
and internal structure, along with the structure of cell, development
8                                                                       BIOLOGY


    process and ecological information of organisms are essential and form
    the basis of modern taxonomic studies.
        Hence, characterisation, identification, classification and nomenclature
    are the processes that are basic to taxonomy.
        Taxonomy is not something new. Human beings have always been
    interested in knowing more and more about the various kinds of
    organisms, particularly with reference to their own use. In early days,
    human beings needed to find sources for their basic needs of food, clothing
    and shelter. Hence, the earliest classifications were based on the ‘uses’ of
    various organisms.
        Human beings were, since long, not only interested in knowing more
    about different kinds of organisms and their diversities, but also the
    relationships among them. This branch of study was referred to as
    systematics. The word systematics is derived from the Latin word
    ‘systema’ which means systematic arrangement of organisms. Linnaeus
    used Systema Naturae as the title of his publication. The scope of
    systematics was later enlarged to include identification, nomenclature
    and classification. Systematics takes into account evolutionary
    relationships between organisms.


    1.3     TAXONOMIC CATEGORIES
    Classification is not a single step process but involves hierarchy of steps
    in which each step represents a rank or category. Since the category is a
    part of overall taxonomic arrangement, it is called the taxonomic category
    and all categories together constitute the taxonomic hierarchy. Each
    category, referred to as a unit of classification, in fact, represents a rank
    and is commonly termed as taxon (pl.: taxa).
        Taxonomic categories and hierarchy can be illustrated by an example.
    Insects represent a group of organisms sharing common features like
    three pairs of jointed legs. It means insects are recognisable concrete
    objects which can be classified, and thus were given a rank or category.
    Can you name other such groups of organisms? Remember, groups
    represent category. Category further denotes rank. Each rank or taxon,
    in fact, represents a unit of classification. These taxonomic groups/
    categories are distinct biological entities and not merely morphological
    aggregates.
        Taxonomical studies of all known organisms have led to the
    development of common categories such as kingdom, phylum or division
    (for plants), class, order, family, genus and species. All organisms,
    including those in the plant and animal kingdoms have species as the
    lowest category. Now the question you may ask is, how to place an
     THE LIVING WORLD                                                           9


organism in various categories? The basic requirement is the knowledge
of characters of an individual or group of organisms. This helps in
identifying similarities and dissimilarities among the individuals of the
same kind of organisms as well as of other kinds of organisms.

1.3.1 Species
Taxonomic studies consider a group of individual organisms with
fundamental similarities as a species. One should be able to distinguish
one species from the other closely related species based on the distinct
morphological differences. Let us consider Mangifera indica, Solanum
tuberosum (potato) and Panthera leo (lion). All the three names, indica,
tuberosum and leo, represent the specific epithets, while the first words
Mangifera, Solanum and Panthera are genera and represents another
higher level of taxon or category. Each genus may have one or more than
one specific epithets representing different organisms, but having
morphological similarities. For example, Panthera has another specific
epithet called tigris and Solanum includes species like nigrum and
melongena. Human beings belong to the species sapiens which is
grouped in the genus Homo. The scientific name thus, for human being,
is written as Homo sapiens.

1.3.2    Genus
Genus comprises a group of related species which has more characters
in common in comparison to species of other genera. We can say that
genera are aggregates of closely related species. For example, potato and
brinjal are two different species but both belong to the genus Solanum.
Lion (Panthera leo), leopard (P. pardus) and tiger (P. tigris) with several
common features, are all species of the genus Panthera. This genus differs
from another genus Felis which includes cats.

1.3.3    Family
The next category, Family, has a group of related genera with still less
number of similarities as compared to genus and species. Families are
characterised on the basis of both vegetative and reproductive features of
plant species. Among plants for example, three different genera Solanum,
Petunia and Datura are placed in the family Solanaceae. Among animals
for example, genus Panthera, comprising lion, tiger, leopard is put along
with genus, Felis (cats) in the family Felidae. Similarly, if you observe the
features of a cat and a dog, you will find some similarities and some
differences as well. They are separated into two different families – Felidae
and Canidae, respectively.
10                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                               1.3.4    Order
                               You have seen earlier that categories like species, genus and
                               families are based on a number of similar characters. Generally,
                               order and other higher taxonomic categories are identified based
                               on the aggregates of characters. Order being a higher category,
                               is the assemblage of families which exhibit a few similar
                               characters. The similar characters are less in number as
                               compared to different genera included in a family. Plant families
                               like Convolvulaceae, Solanaceae are included in the order
                               Polymoniales mainly based on the floral characters. The animal
                               order, Carnivora, includes families like Felidae and Canidae.

                               1.3.5 Class
                               This category includes related orders. For example, order Primata
                               comprising monkey, gorilla and gibbon is placed in class
                               Mammalia along with order Carnivora that includes animals like
                               tiger, cat and dog. Class Mammalia has other orders also.

                               1.3.6    Phylum
                               Classes comprising animals like fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds
                               along with mammals constitute the next higher category called
                               Phylum. All these, based on the common features like presence
                               of notochord and dorsal hollow neural system, are included in
                               phylum Chordata. In case of plants, classes with a few similar
                               characters are assigned to a higher category called Division.

                               1.3.7 Kingdom
                               All animals belonging to various phyla are assigned to the
                               highest category called Kingdom Animalia in the classification
                               system of animals. The Kingdom Plantae, on the other hand, is
                               distinct, and comprises all plants from various divisions.
                               Henceforth, we will refer to these two groups as animal and
                               plant kingdoms.
                                   The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom have been
                               shown in ascending order starting with species in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1 T a x o n o m i c   These are broad categories. However, taxonomists have also
           categories          developed sub-categories in this hierarchy to facilitate more
           s h o w i n g
                               sound and scientific placement of various taxa.
           hierarchial
           arrangement             Look at the hierarchy in Figure 1.1. Can you recall the basis
           in ascending        of arrangement? Say, for example, as we go higher from species
           order               to kingdom, the number of common characteristics goes on
     THE LIVING WORLD                                                                       11


decreasing. Lower the taxa, more are the characteristics that the members
within the taxon share. Higher the category, greater is the difficulty of
determining the relationship to other taxa at the same level. Hence, the
problem of classification becomes more complex.
Table 1.1 indicates the taxonomic categories to which some common
organisms like housefly, man, mango and wheat belong.

                     TABLE 1.1 Organisms with their Taxonomic Categories
 Common      Biological     Genus      Family           Order        Class          Phylum/
 Name         Name                                                                  Division


 Man         Homo sapiens Homo         Hominidae        Primata      Mammalia       Chordata

 Housefly    Musca          Musca      Muscidae         Diptera      Insecta        Arthropoda
             domestica

 Mango       Mangifera      Mangifera Anacardiaceae Sapindales Dicotyledonae        Angiospermae
             indica


 Wheat       Triticum       Triticum   Poaceae          Poales       Monocotyledonae Angiospermae
             aestivum



1.4 TAXONOMICAL AIDS
Taxonomic studies of various species of plants, animals and other
organisms are useful in agriculture, forestry, industry and in general in
knowing our bio-resources and their diversity. These studies would
require correct classification and identification of organisms. Identification
of organisms requires intensive laboratory and field studies. The collection
of actual specimens of plant and animal species is essential and is the
prime source of taxonomic studies. These are also fundamental to studies
and essential for training in systematics. It is used for classification of an
organism, and the information gathered is also stored along with the
specimens. In some cases the specimen is preserved for future studies.
    Biologists have established certain procedures and techniques to store
and preserve the information as well as the specimens. Some of these are
explained to help you understand the usage of these aids.

1.4.1    Herbarium
Herbarium is a store house of collected plant specimens that are dried,
pressed and preserved on sheets. Further, these sheets are arranged
12                                                                            BIOLOGY




     Figure 1.2 Herbarium showing stored specimens

        according to a universally accepted system of classification. These
        specimens, along with their descriptions on herbarium sheets, become a
        store house or repository for future use (Figure 1.2). The herbarium sheets
        also carry a label providing information about date and place of collection,
        English, local and botanical names, family, collector’s name, etc. Herbaria
        also serve as quick referral systems in taxonomical studies.

        1.4.2 Botanical Gardens
        These specialised gardens have collections of living plants for reference.
        Plant species in these gardens are grown for identification purposes and
        each plant is labelled indicating its botanical/scientific name and its family.
        The famous botanical gardens are at Kew (England), Indian Botanical
        Garden, Howrah (India) and at National Botanical Research Institute,
        Lucknow (India).

        1.4.3    Museum
        Biological museums are generally set up in educational institutes such
        as schools and colleges. Museums have collections of preserved plant
        and animal specimens for study and reference. Specimens are preserved
        in the containers or jars in preservative solutions. Plant and animal
        specimens may also be preserved as dry specimens. Insects are preserved
        in insect boxes after collecting, killing and pinning. Larger animals like
        birds and mammals are usually stuffed and preserved. Museums often
        have collections of skeletons of animals too.
     THE LIVING WORLD                                                                    13


1.4.4    Zoological Parks
These are the places where wild animals are kept in protected environments
under human care and which enable us to learn about their food habits
and behaviour. All animals in a zoo are provided, as far as possible, the
conditions similar to their natural habitats. Children love visiting these
parks, commonly called Zoos (Figure 1.3).




            Figure 1.3 Pictures showing animals in different zoological parks of India
1.4.5    Key
Key is another taxonomical aid used for identification of plants and animals
based on the similarities and dissimilarities. The keys are based on the
contrasting characters generally in a pair called couplet. It represents
the choice made between two opposite options. This results in acceptance
of only one and rejection of the other. Each statement in the key is called
a lead. Separate taxonomic keys are required for each taxonomic category
such as family, genus and species for identification purposes. Keys are
generally analytical in nature.
14                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                         Flora, manuals, monographs and catalogues are some other means
                     of recording descriptions. They also help in correct identification. Flora
                     contains the actual account of habitat and distribution of plants of a
                     given area. These provide the index to the plant species found in a
                     particular area. Manuals are useful in providing information for
                     identification of names of species found in an area. Monographs contain
                     information on any one taxon.




                                            SUMMARY

     The living world is rich in variety. Millions of plants and animals have been
     identified and described but a large number still remains unknown. The very
     range of organisms in terms of size, colour, habitat, physiological and
     morphological features make us seek the defining characteristics of living
     organisms. In order to facilitate the study of kinds and diversity of organisms,
     biologists have evolved certain rules and principles for identification, nomenclature
     and classification of organisms. The branch of knowledge dealing with these aspects
     is referred to as taxonomy. The taxonomic studies of various species of plants
     and animals are useful in agriculture, forestry, industry and in general for knowing
     our bio-resources and their diversity. The basics of taxonomy like identification,
     naming and classification of organisms are universally evolved under international
     codes. Based on the resemblances and distinct differences, each organism is
     identified and assigned a correct scientific/biological name comprising two words
     as per the binomial system of nomenclature. An organism represents/occupies a
     place or position in the system of classification. There are many categories/ranks
     and are generally referred to as taxonomic categories or taxa. All the categories
     constitute a taxonomic hierarchy.
         Taxonomists have developed a variety of taxonomic aids to facilitate
     identification, naming and classification of organisms. These studies are carried
     out from the actual specimens which are collected from the field and preserved as
     referrals in the form of herbaria, museums and in botanical gardens and zoological
     parks. It requires special techniques for collection and preservation of specimens
     in herbaria and museums. Live specimens, on the other hand, of plants and
     animals, are found in botanical gardens or in zoological parks. Taxonomists also
     prepare and disseminate information through manuals and monographs for
     further taxonomic studies. Taxonomic keys are tools that help in identification
     based on characteristics.
THE LIVING WORLD                                                                             15


                                          EXERCISES

   1.   Why are living organisms classified?
   2.   Why are the classification systems changing every now and then?
   3.   What different criteria would you choose to classify people that you meet often?
   4.   What do we learn from identification of individuals and populations?
   5.   Given below is the scientific name of Mango. Identify the correctly written name.
        Mangifera Indica
        Mangifera indica
   6.   Define a taxon. Give some examples of taxa at different hierarchical levels.
   7.   Can you identify the correct sequence of taxonomical categories?
        (a)    Species            Order            Phylum             Kingdom
        (b)    Genus              Species          Order              Kingdom
        (c)    Species            Genus            Order              Phylum
   8.   Try to collect all the currently accepted meanings for the word ‘species’. Discuss
        with your teacher the meaning of species in case of higher plants and animals
        on one hand, and bacteria on the other hand.
   9.   Define and understand the following terms:
        (i) Phylum (ii) Class (iii) Family (iv) Order (v) Genus
  10. How is a key helpful in the identification and classification of an organism?
  11. Illustrate the taxonomical hierarchy with suitable examples of a plant and an
      animal.
 84                                                                                              BIOLOGY




                           CHAPTER 6
                           ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
6.1 The Tissues      You can very easily see the structural similarities and variations in the
                     external morphology of the larger living organism, both plants and
6.2 The Tissue
                     animals. Similarly, if we were to study the internal structure, one also
    System
                     finds several similarities as well as differences. This chapter introduces
6.3 Anatomy of       you to the internal structure and functional organisation of higher plants.
    Dicotyledonous   Study of internal structure of plants is called anatomy. Plants have cells
    and              as the basic unit, cells are organised into tissues and in turn the tissues
    Monocotyledonous are organised into organs. Different organs in a plant show differences in
    Plants           their internal structure. Within angiosperms, the monocots and dicots
                     are also seen to be anatomically different. Internal structures also show
6.4 Secondary        adaptations to diverse environments.
    Growth
                      6.1 THE TISSUES
                      A tissue is a group of cells having a common origin and usually performing
                      a common function. A plant is made up of different kinds of tissues. Tissues
                      are classified into two main groups, namely, meristematic and permanent
                      tissues based on whether the cells being formed are capable of dividing
                      or not.

                      6.1.1 Meristematic Tissues
                      Growth in plants is largely restricted to specialised regions of active cell division
                      called meristems (Gk. meristos: divided). Plants have different kinds of
                      meristems. The meristems which occur at the tips of roots and shoots and
                      produce primary tissues are called apical meristems (Figure 6.1).
     ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                               85




Central cylinder

       Cortex                                                                  Leaf primordium



   Protoderm                                                                    Shoot apical
                                                                                Meristematic zone
 Initials of central
      cylinder
                                       Root apical                              Axillary bud
     and cortex
                                        meristem
                                                                               Differentiating
    Initials of
                                                                               vascular tissue
     root cap


       Root cap

                            Figure 6.1 Apical meristem: (a) Root (b) Shoot


Root apical meristem occupies the tip of a root while the shoot apical
meristem occupies the distant most region of the stem axis. During the
formation of leaves and elongation of stem, some cells ‘left behind’ from
shoot apical meristem, constitute the axillary bud. Such buds are present
in the axils of leaves and are capable of forming a branch or a flower. The
meristem which occurs between mature tissues is known as intercalary
meristem. They occur in grasses and regenerate parts removed by the
grazing herbivores. Both apical meristems and intercalary meristems are
primary meristems because they appear early in life of a plant and
contribute to the formation of the primary plant body.
   The meristem that occurs in the mature regions of roots and shoots of
many plants, particularly those that produce woody axis and appear
later than primary meristem is called the secondary or lateral meristem.
They are cylindrical meristems. Fascicular vascular cambium,
interfascicular cambium and cork-cambium are examples of lateral
meristems. These are responsible for producing the secondary tissues.
   Following divisions of cells in both primary and as well as secondary
meristems, the newly formed cells become structurally and functionally
specialised and lose the ability to divide. Such cells are termed permanent
or mature cells and constitute the permanent tissues. During the
formation of the primary plant body, specific regions of the apical meristem
produce dermal tissues, ground tissues and vascular tissues.
 86                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                                                     6.1.2 Permanent Tissues
                                                     The cells of the permanent tissues do not generally
                                                     divide further. Permanent tissues having all cells
                                                     similar in structure and function are called simple
                                                     tissues. Permanent tissues having many different
                                                     types of cells are called complex tissues.

                            Intercelluar space       6.1.2.1   Simple Tissues
                                                     A simple tissue is made of only one type of cells.
                                                     The various simple tissues in plants are
                                                     parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma
                                                     (Figure 6.2). Parenchyma forms the major
            (a)                                      component within organs. The cells of the
                                                     parenchyma are generally isodiametric. They
                        Thickened corners            may be spherical, oval, round, polygonal or
                         Protoplasm
                                                     elongated in shape. Their walls are thin and made
                         Vacuole
                                                     up of cellulose. They may either be closely packed
                            Cell wall                or have small intercellular spaces. The
                                                     parenchyma performs various functions like
                                                     photosynthesis, storage, secretion.
                                                         The collenchyma occurs in layers below the
                                                     epidermis in dicotyledonous plants. It is found
                                                     either as a homogeneous layer or in patches. It
              (b)                                    consists of cells which are much thickened at the
                                                     corners due to a deposition of cellulose,
                                                     hemicellulose and pectin. Collenchymatous cells
                                                     may be oval, spherical or polygonal and often
                                        Pits
            Lumen                                    contain chloroplasts. These cells assimilate food
            Thick                                    when they contain chloroplasts. Intercellular
            cell wall                                spaces are absent. They provide mechanical
                                           Lumen
                                                     support to the growing parts of the plant such as
                                         Thick       young stem and petiole of a leaf.
                                         cell wall       Sclerenchyma consists of long, narrow cells
                        A sclereid                   with thick and lignified cell walls having a few or
  A fibre
                                                     numerous pits. They are usually dead and without
              (c)                                    protoplasts. On the basis of variation in form,
                                                     structure, origin and development, sclerenchyma
Figure 6.2 Simple tissues :
           (a) Parenchyma
                                                     may be either fibres or sclereids. The fibres are
           (b) Collenchyma                           thick-walled, elongated and pointed cells,
           (c) Sclerenchyma                          generally occuring in groups, in various parts of
                                                     the plant. The sclereids are spherical, oval or
                                                     cylindrical, highly thickened dead cells with very
    ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                             87


narrow cavities (lumen). These are commonly found in the fruit
walls of nuts; pulp of fruits like guava, pear and sapota; seed
coats of legumes and leaves of tea. Sclerenchyma provides
mechanical support to organs.


6.1.2.2   Complex Tissues
                                                                       Tracheid
The complex tissues are made of more than one type of cells                            Vessels
and these work together as a unit. Xylem and phloem constitute
the complex tissues in plants (Figure 6.3).
    Xylem functions as a conducting tissue for water and
minerals from roots to the stem and leaves. It also provides
mechanical strength to the plant parts. It is composed of four
different kinds of elements, namely, tracheids, vessels, xylem
fibres and xylem parenchyma. Gymnosperms lack vessels in
their xylem. Tracheids are elongated or tube like cells with
thick and lignified walls and tapering ends. These are dead and
are without protoplasm. The inner layers of the cell walls have
thickenings which vary in form. In flowering plants, tracheids
and vessels are the main water transporting elements. Vessel is
a long cylindrical tube-like structure made up of many cells
called vessel members, each with lignified walls and a large                (a)

central cavity. The vessel cells are also devoid of protoplasm.
Vessel members are interconnected through perforations in their
                                                                                       Sieve pore
common walls. The presence of vessels is a characteristic feature
of angiosperms. Xylem fibres have highly thickened walls and                           Sieve tube
obliterated central lumens. These may either be septate or                             element
aseptate. Xylem parenchyma cells are living and thin-walled,                           Phloem
and their cell walls are made up of cellulose. They store food                         parenchyma
materials in the form of starch or fat, and other substances like                      Companion
                                                                                       cell
tannins. The radial conduction of water takes place by the ray
parenchymatous cells.
    Primary xylem is of two types – protoxylem and metaxylem.
The first formed primary xylem elements are called protoxylem               (b)

and the later formed primary xylem is called metaxylem. In
                                                                    Figure 6.3 (a) Xylem
stems, the protoxylem lies towards the centre (pith) and the
                                                                               (b) Phloem
metaxylem lies towards the periphery of the organ. This type
of primary xylem is called endarch. In roots, the protoxylem
lies towards periphery and metaxylem lies towards the centre.
Such arrangement of primary xylem is called exarch.
    Phloem transports food materials, usually from leaves to
other parts of the plant. Phloem in angiosperms is composed
of sieve tube elements, companion cells, phloem parenchyma
88                                                                       BIOLOGY


     and phloem fibres. Gymnosperms have albuminous cells and sieve cells.
     They lack sieve tubes and companion cells. Sieve tube elements are
     also long, tube-like structures, arranged longitudinally and are
     associated with the companion cells. Their end walls are perforated in a
     sieve-like manner to form the sieve plates. A mature sieve element
     possesses a peripheral cytoplasm and a large vacuole but lacks a nucleus.
     The functions of sieve tubes are controlled by the nucleus of companion
     cells. The companion cells are specialised parenchymatous cells, which
     are closely associated with sieve tube elements. The sieve tube elements
     and companion cells are connected by pit fields present between their
     common longitudinal walls. The companion cells help in maintaining the
     pressure gradient in the sieve tubes. Phloem parenchyma is made up
     of elongated, tapering cylindrical cells which have dense cytoplasm and
     nucleus. The cell wall is composed of cellulose and has pits through which
     plasmodesmatal connections exist between the cells. The phloem
     parenchyma stores food material and other substances like resins, latex
     and mucilage. Phloem parenchyma is absent in most of the
     monocotyledons. Phloem fibres (bast fibres) are made up of
     sclerenchymatous cells. These are generally absent in the primary phloem
     but are found in the secondary phloem. These are much elongated,
     unbranched and have pointed, needle like apices. The cell wall of phloem
     fibres is quite thick. At maturity, these fibres lose their protoplasm and
     become dead. Phloem fibres of jute, flax and hemp are used commercially.
     The first formed primary phloem consists of narrow sieve tubes and is
     referred to as protophloem and the later formed phloem has bigger sieve
     tubes and is referred to as metaphloem.


     6.2 T HE TISSUE S YSTEM
     We were discussing types of tissues based on the types of cells present.
     Let us now consider how tissues vary depending on their location in the
     plant body. Their structure and function would also be dependent on
     location. On the basis of their structure and location, there are three types
     of tissue systems. These are the epidermal tissue system, the ground or
     fundamental tissue system and the vascular or conducting tissue system.

     6.2.1 Epidermal Tissue System
     The epidermal tissue system forms the outer-most covering of the whole
     plant body and comprises epidermal cells, stomata and the epidermal
     appendages – the trichomes and hairs. The epidermis is the outermost
     layer of the primary plant body. It is made up of elongated, compactly
     ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                          89


arranged cells, which form a continuous layer. Epidermis is usually single-
layered. Epidermal cells are parenchymatous with a small amount of
cytoplasm lining the cell wall and a large vacuole. The outside of the
epidermis is often covered with a waxy thick layer called the cuticle which
prevents the loss of water. Cuticle is absent in roots. Stomata are structures
present in the epidermis of leaves. Stomata regulate the process of
transpiration and gaseous exchange. Each stoma is composed of two bean-
shaped cells known as guard cells which enclose stomatal pore. In grasses,
the guard cells are dumb-bell shaped. The outer walls of guard cells (away
from the stomatal pore) are thin and the inner walls (towards the stomatal
pore) are highly thickened. The guard cells possess chloroplasts and
regulate the opening and closing of stomata. Sometimes, a few epidermal
cells, in the vicinity of the guard cells become specialised in their shape and
size and are known as subsidiary cells. The stomatal aperture, guard
cells and the surrounding subsidiary cells are together called stomatal
apparatus (Figure 6.4).

                                           Epidermal cells

                                           Subsidiary cells
                                           Chloroplast
                                            Guard cells
                                            Stomatal
                                              pore

       Figure 6.4 Diagrammatic representation: (a) stomata with bean-shaped guard cells
                  (b) stomata with dumb-bell shaped guard cell

    The cells of epidermis bear a number of hairs. The root hairs are
unicellular elongations of the epidermal cells and help absorb water and
minerals from the soil. On the stem the epidermal hairs are called
trichomes. The trichomes in the shoot system are usually multicellular.
They may be branched or unbranched and soft or stiff. They may even
be secretory. The trichomes help in preventing water loss due to
transpiration.

6.2.2 The Ground Tissue System
All tissues except epidermis and vascular bundles constitute the ground
tissue. It consists of simple tissues such as parenchyma, collenchyma
and sclerenchyma. Parenchymatous cells are usually present in cortex,
pericycle, pith and medullary rays, in the primary stems and roots. In
leaves, the ground tissue consists of thin-walled chloroplast containing
cells and is called mesophyll.
 90                                                                                       BIOLOGY



                                                 6.2.3 The Vascular Tissue System
                                                 The vascular system consists of complex tissues,
                                                 the phloem and the xylem.The xylem and
                                                 phloem together constitute vascular bundles
                                                 (Figure 6.5). In dicotyledonous stems, cambium
                                                 is present between phloem and xylem. Such
                                                 vascular bundles because of the presence of
                                                 cambium possess the ability to form secondary
                                                 xylem and phloem tissues, and hence are called
                                                 open vascular bundles. In the monocotyledons,
                                                 the vascular bundles have no cambium present
                                                 in them. Hence, since they do not form secondary
                                                 tissues they are referred to as closed. When
                                                 xylem and phloem within a vascular bundle are
                                                 arranged in an alternate manner on different
                                                 radii, the arrangement is called radial such as
                                                 in roots. In conjoint type of vascular bundles,
                                                 the xylem and phloem are situated at the same
                                                 radius of vascular bundles. Such vascular
                                                 bundles are common in stems and leaves. The
                                                 conjoint vascular bundles usually have the
                                                 phloem located only on the outer side of xylem.


                                                 6.3    ANATOMY OF DICOTYLEDONOUS AND
                                                        MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS

Figure 6.5 Various types of vascular bundles :   For a better understanding of tissue
           (a) radial (b) conjoint closed        organisation of roots, stems and leaves, it is
           (c) conjoint open
                                                 convenient to study the transverse sections of
                                                 the mature zones of these organs.


                                                 6.3.1 Dicotyledonous Root
                                                 Look at Figure 6.6 (a), it shows the transverse
                                                 section of the sunflower root. The internal tissue
                                                 organisation is as follows:
                                                     The outermost layer is epidermis. Many of
                                                 the epidermal cells protrude in the form of
                                                 unicellular root hairs. The cortex consists of
                                                 several layers of thin-walled parenchyma cells
     ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                               91


with intercellular spaces. The innermost layer
of the cortex is called endodermis. It                                             Root hair
comprises a single layer of barrel-shaped cells                                    Epidermis

without any intercellular spaces. The
tangential as well as radial walls of the                                          Cortex
endodermal cells have a deposition of water-
impermeable, waxy material-suberin-in the
form of casparian strips. Next to endodermis
                                                                                  Endodermis
lies a few layers of thick-walled                                                 Pericycle
parenchyomatous cells referred to as                                              Protoxylem
pericycle. Initiation of lateral roots and                                         Metaxylem
vascular cambium during the secondary
                                                                                   Pith
growth takes place in these cells. The pith is
                                                                                   Phloem
small or inconspicuous. The parenchymatous
cells which lie between the xylem and the                      (a)
phloem are called conjuctive tissue. There
                                                                                  Root hair
are usually two to four xylem and phloem
patches. Later, a cambium ring develops                                             Epidermis
between the xylem and phloem. All tissues
on the innerside of the endodermis such as
pericycle, vascular bundles and pith                                              Cortex
constitute the stele.                                                              Endodermis

                                                                                   Pericycle
6.3.2 Monocotyledonous Root                                                        Phloem

The anatomy of the monocot root is similar to                                      Protoxylem

the dicot root in many respects (Figure 6.6 b).
It has epidermis, cortex, endodermis,                                             Pith
pericycle, vascular bundles and pith. As                                        Metaxylem
compared to the dicot root which have fewer
xylem bundles, there are usually more than                      (b)
six (polyarch) xylem bundles in the monocot       Figure 6.6   T.S. : (a) Dicot root (Primary)
root. Pith is large and well developed.                        (b) Monocot root
Monocotyledonous roots do not undergo any
secondary growth.

6.3.3 Dicotyledonous Stem
The transverse section of a typical young
dicotyledonous stem shows that the epidermis
is the outermost protective layer of the stem
92                                                                         BIOLOGY


     (Figure 6.7 a). Covered with a thin layer of cuticle, it may bear trichomes and
     a few stomata. The cells arranged in multiple layers between epidermis and
     pericycle constitute the cortex. It consists of three sub-zones. The outer
     hypodermis, consists of a few layers of collenchymatous cells just below the
     epidermis, which provide mechanical strength to the young stem. Cortical
     layers below hypodermis consist of rounded thin walled parenchymatous
     cells with conspicuous intercellular spaces. The innermost layer of the cortex
     is called the endodermis. The cells of the endodermis are rich in starch
     grains and the layer is also referred to as the starch sheath. Pericycle is




      Figure 6.7 T.S. of stem : (a) Dicot (b) Monocot
     ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                   93


present on the inner side of the endodermis and above the phloem in the
form of semi-lunar patches of sclerenchyma. In between the vascular bundles
there are a few layers of radially placed parenchymatous cells, which constitute
medullary rays. A large number of vascular bundles are arranged in a ring ;
the ‘ring’ arrangement of vascular bundles is a characteristic of dicot stem.
Each vascular bundle is conjoint, open, and with endarch protoxylem. A
large number of rounded, parenchymatous cells with large intercellular
spaces which occupy the central portion of the stem constitute the pith.

6.3.4 Monocotyledonous Stem
The monocot stem has a sclerenchymatous hypodermis, a large number
of scattered vascular bundles, each surrounded by a sclerenchymatous
bundle sheath, and a large, conspicuous parenchymatous ground tissue
(Figure 6.7b). Vascular bundles are conjoint and closed. Peripheral
vascular bundles are generally smaller than the centrally located ones.
The phloem parenchyma is absent, and water-containing cavities are
present within the vascular bundles.

6.3.5 Dorsiventral (Dicotyledonous) Leaf
The vertical section of a dorsiventral leaf through the lamina shows three
main parts, namely, epidermis, mesophyll and vascular system. The
epidermis which covers both the upper surface (adaxial epidermis) and
lower surface (abaxial epidermis) of the leaf has a conspicuous cuticle.
The abaxial epidermis generally bears more stomata than the adaxial
epidermis. The latter may even lack stomata. The tissue between the upper
and the lower epidermis is called the mesophyll. Mesophyll, which
possesses chloroplasts and carry out photosynthesis, is made up of
parenchyma. It has two types of cells – the palisade parenchyma and
the spongy parenchyma. The adaxially placed palisade parenchyma is
made up of elongated cells, which are arranged vertically and parallel to
each other. The oval or round and loosely arranged spongy parenchyma
is situated below the palisade cells and extends to the lower epidermis.
There are numerous large spaces and air cavities between these cells.
Vascular system includes vascular bundles, which can be seen in the
veins and the midrib. The size of the vascular bundles are dependent on
the size of the veins. The veins vary in thickness in the reticulate venation
of the dicot leaves. The vascular bundles are surrounded by a layer of
thick walled bundle sheath cells. Look at Figure 6.8 (a) and find the
position of xylem in the vascular bundle.

6.3.6    Isobilateral (Monocotyledonous) Leaf
The anatomy of isobilateral leaf is similar to that of the dorsiventral leaf in
many ways. It shows the following characteristic differences. In an
94                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                                                   isobilateral leaf, the stomata are present
                                                   on both the surfaces of the epidermis; and
                                                   the mesophyll is not differentiated into
                                                   palisade and spongy parenchyma (Figure
                                                   6.8 b).
                                                       In grasses, certain adaxial epidermal
                                                   cells along the veins modify themselves
                                                   into large, empty, colourless cells. These
                                                   are called bulliform cells. When the
                                                   bulliform cells in the leaves have absorbed
                                                   water and are turgid, the leaf surface is
                                                   exposed. When they are flaccid due to
                                                   water stress, they make the leaves curl
                                                   inwards to minimise water loss.
                                                       The parallel venation in monocot
                                                   leaves is reflected in the near similar sizes
                                                   of vascular bundles (except in main veins)
                                                   as seen in vertical sections of the leaves.

                                                   6.4 SECONDARY GROWTH
                                                   The growth of the roots and stems in
                                                   length with the help of apical meristem is
                                                   called the primary growth. Apart from
                                                   primary growth most dicotyledonous
                                                   plants exhibit an increase in girth. This
                                                   increase is called the secondary growth.
                                                   The tissues involved in secondary growth
                                                   are the two lateral meristems: vascular
 Figure 6.8 T.S. of leaf : (a) Dicot (b) Monocot
                                                   cambium and cork cambium.

                                                   6.4.1 Vascular Cambium
                                                   The meristematic layer that is responsible
                                                   for cutting off vascular tissues – xylem and
                                                   pholem – is called vascular cambium. In
                                                   the young stem it is present in patches as
                                                   a single layer between the xylem and
                                                   phloem. Later it forms a complete ring.

                                                   6.4.1.1    Formation of cambial ring
                                                   In dicot stems, the cells of cambium present
                                                   between primary xylem and primary
                                                   phloem is the intrafascicular cambium.
    ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                            95


The cells of medullary rays, adjoining these intrafascicular cambium become
meristematic and form the interfascicular cambium. Thus, a continuous
ring of cambium is formed.

6.4.1.2   Activity of the cambial ring
The cambial ring becomes active and begins to cut off new cells, both
towards the inner and the outer sides. The cells cut off towards pith,
mature into secondary xylem and the cells cut off towards periphery
mature into secondary phloem. The cambium is generally more active
on the inner side than on the outer. As a result, the amount of secondary
xylem produced is more than secondary phloem and soon forms a
compact mass. The primary and secondary phloems get gradually
crushed due to the continued formation and accumulation of secondary
xylem. The primary xylem however remains more or less intact, in or
around the centre. At some places, the cambium forms a narrow band of
parenchyma, which passes through the secondary xylem and the
secondary phloem in the radial directions. These are the secondary
medullary rays (Figure 6.9).




     Figure 6.9 Secondary growth in a dicot stem (diagrammatic) – stages in transverse views
96                                                                       BIOLOGY


     6.4.1.3   Spring wood and autumn wood

     The activity of cambium is under the control of many physiological and
     environmental factors. In temperate regions, the climatic conditions are
     not uniform through the year. In the spring season, cambium is very
     active and produces a large number of xylary elements having vessels
     with wider cavities. The wood formed during this season is called spring
     wood or early wood. In winter, the cambium is less active and forms
     fewer xylary elements that have narrow vessels, and this wood is called
     autumn wood or late wood.
         The spring wood is lighter in colour and has a lower density whereas
     the autumn wood is darker and has a higher density. The two kinds of
     woods that appear as alternate concentric rings, constitute an annual ring.
     Annual rings seen in a cut stem give an estimate of the age of the tree.

     6.4.1.4 Heartwood and sapwood

     In old trees, the greater part of secondary xylem is dark brown due to
     deposition of organic compounds like tannins, resins, oils, gums, aromatic
     substances and essential oils in the central or innermost layers of the stem.
     These substances make it hard, durable and resistant to the attacks of micro-
     organisms and insects. This region comprises dead elements with highly
     lignified walls and is called heartwood. The heartwood does not conduct
     water but it gives mechanical support to the stem. The peripheral region of
     the secondary xylem, is lighter in colour and is known as the sapwood. It is
     involved in the conduction of water and minerals from root to leaf.

     6.4.2 Cork Cambium
     As the stem continues to increase in girth due to the activity of vascular
     cambium, the outer cortical and epidermis layers get broken and need to
     be replaced to provide new protective cell layers. Hence, sooner or later,
     another meristematic tissue called cork cambium or phellogen develops,
     usually in the cortex region. Phellogen is a couple of layers thick. It is
     made of narrow, thin-walled and nearly rectangular cells. Phellogen cuts
     off cells on both sides. The outer cells differentiate into cork or phellem
     while the inner cells differentiate into secondary cortex or phelloderm.
     The cork is impervious to water due to suberin deposition in the cell wall.
     The cells of secondary cortex are parenchymatous. Phellogen, phellem,
     and phelloderm are collectively known as periderm. Due to activity of
     the cork cambium, pressure builds up on the remaining layers peripheral
     ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                     97


to phellogen and ultimately these
layers die and slough off. Bark is a                                     Epidermis
non-technical term that refers to all
                                                                         Complimentary
tissues exterior to the vascular                                         cells
cambium, therefore including
secondary phloem. Bark refers to a
number of tissue types, viz.,                                                Cork cambium
periderm and secondary phloem.
Bark that is formed early in the
season is called early or soft bark.
                                                                              Secondary
Towards the end of the season, late                                           cortex
or hard bark is formed. Name the                                  (a)
various kinds of cell layers which
                                                      (a)
constitute the bark.
    At certain regions, the phellogen
cuts off closely arranged
parenchymatous cells on the outer
side instead of cork cells. These
parenchymatous cells soon rupture
the epidermis, forming a lens-
shaped openings called lenticels.
Lenticels permit the exchange of
gases between the outer atmosphere
and the internal tissue of the stem.
These occur in most woody trees
(Figure 6.10).

6.4.3 Secondary Growth in
      Roots                                                 (b)
In the dicot root, the vascular           Figure 6.10 (a) Lenticel and (b) Bark
cambium is completely secondary in
origin. It originates from the tissue
located just below the phloem
bundles, a portion of pericycle tissue,
above the protoxylem forming a
complete and continuous wavy ring,
which later becomes circular (Figure
6.11). Further events are similar to
those already described above for a
dicotyledon stem.
98                                                                                      BIOLOGY



                                   Epidermis
                                   Cortex
                                   Primary phloem
                                   Cambial ring
                                   Endodermis
                                   Pericycle
                                   Protoxylem




                                                                              Epidermis/periderm
                          Epidermis
                                                                              Cortex
                          Cortex                                               Primary phloem
                        Vascular cambium                                        Annual ring
                         Secondary phloem
                         Primary xylem                                         Secondary xylem
                         Secondary xylem
                                                                               Secondary
                                                                               phloem rays
                         Cortex




         Figure 6.11 Different stages of the secondary growth in a typical dicot root


                       Secondary growth also occurs in stems and roots of gymnosperms.
                     However, secondary growth does not occur in monocotyledons.



                                            SUMMARY

     Anatomically, a plant is made of different kinds of tissues. The plant tissues are
     broadly classified into meristematic (apical, lateral and intercalary) and permanent
     (simple and complex). Assimilation of food and its storage, transportation of water,
     minerals and photosynthates, and mechanical support are the main functions of
     tissues. There are three types of tissue systems – epidermal, ground and vascular.
     The epidermal tissue systems are made of epidermal cells, stomata and the
     epidermal appendages. The ground tissue system forms the main bulk of the
     plant. It is divided into three zones – cortex, pericycle and pith. The vascular
     tissue system is formed by the xylem and phloem. On the basis of presence of
     cambium, location of xylem and phloem, the vascular bundles are of different
     types. The vascular bundles form the conducting tissue and translocate water,
     minerals and food material.
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS                                                                 99


       Monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants show marked variation in their
  internal structures. They differ in type, number and location of vascular bundles.
  The secondary growth occurs in most of the dicotyledonous roots and stems and
  it increases the girth (diameter) of the organs by the activity of the vascular cambium
  and the cork cambium. The wood is actually a secondary xylem. There are different
  types of wood on the basis of their composition and time of production.



                                          EXERCISES

   1.   State the location and function of different types of meristems.
   2.   Cork cambium forms tissues that form the cork. Do you agree with this
        statement? Explain.
   3.   Explain the process of secondary growth in the stems of woody angiosperms
        with the help of schematic diagrams. What is its significance?
   4.   Draw illustrations to bring out the anatomical difference between
        (a) Monocot root and Dicot root
        (b) Monocot stem and Dicot stem
   5.   Cut a transverse section of young stem of a plant from your school garden and
        observe it under the microscope. How would you ascertain whether it is a
        monocot stem or a dicot stem? Give reasons.
   6.   The transverse section of a plant material shows the following anatomical
        features - (a) the vascular bundles are conjoint, scattered and surrounded by a
        sclerenchymatous bundle sheaths. (b) phloem parenchyma is absent. What
        will you identify it as?
   7.   Why are xylem and phloem called complex tissues?
   8.   What is stomatal apparatus? Explain the structure of stomata with a labelled
        diagram.
   9.   Name the three basic tissue systems in the flowering plants. Give the tissue
        names under each system.
  10.   How is the study of plant anatomy useful to us?
  11,   What is periderm? How does periderm formation take place in the dicot stems?
  12.   Describe the internal structure of a dorsiventral leaf with the help of labelled
        diagrams.
                           UNIT 4
                           PLANT PHYSIOLOGY

Chapter 11                 The description of structure and variation of living organisms over a
Transport in Plants        period of time, ended up as two, apparently irreconcilable perspectives
                           on biology. The two perspectives essentially rested on two levels of
Chapter 12                 organisation of life forms and phenomena. One described at organismic
Mineral Nutrition          and above level of organisation while the second described at cellular
                           and molecular level of organisation. The first resulted in ecology and
Chapter 13
                           related disciplines. The second resulted in physiology and biochemistry.
Photosynthesis in Higher
Plants                     Description of physiological processes, in flowering plants as an
                           example, is what is given in the chapters in this unit. The processes of
Chapter 14                 mineral nutrition of plants, photosynthesis, transport, respiration and
Respiration in Plants      ultimately plant growth and development are described in molecular
                           terms but in the context of cellular activities and even at organism
Chapter 15                 level. Wherever appropriate, the relation of the physiological processes
Plant Growth and           to environment is also discussed.
Development
                MELVIN CALVIN born in Minnesota in April, 1911, received his
                Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Minnesota. He served
                as Professor of Chemistry at the University of California,
                Berkeley.
                    Just after world war II, when the world was under shock
                after the Hiroshima-Nagasaki bombings, and seeing the ill-
                effects of radio-activity, Calvin and co-workers put radio-
                activity to beneficial use. He along with J.A. Bassham studied
                reactions in green plants forming sugar and other substances
                from raw materials like carbon dioxide, water and minerals
                by labelling the carbon dioxide with C14. Calvin proposed that
                plants change light energy to chemical energy by transferring
                an electron in an organised array of pigment molecules and
                other substances. The mapping of the pathway of carbon
                assimilation in photosynthesis earned him Nobel Prize in 1961.
                    The principles of photosynthesis as established by Calvin
                are, at present, being used in studies on renewable resource
                for energy and materials and basic studies in solar energy
Melvin Calvin   research.
                           CHAPTER 11
                           TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
11.1 Means of          Have you ever wondered how water reaches the top of tall trees, or for that
     Transport         matter how and why substances move from one cell to the other, whether
                       all substances move in a similar way, in the same direction and whether
11.2 Plant-Water       metabolic energy is required for moving substances. Plants need to move
     Relations         molecules over very long distances, much more than animals do; they also
11.3 Long Distance     do not have a circulatory system in place. Water taken up by the roots has
     Transport of      to reach all parts of the plant, up to the very tip of the growing stem. The
     Water             photosynthates or food synthesised by the leaves have also to be moved to
                       all parts including the root tips embedded deep inside the soil. Movement
11.4 Transpiration     across short distances, say within the cell, across the membranes and from
11.5 Uptake and        cell to cell within the tissue has also to take place. To understand some of
     Transport of      the transport processes that take place in plants, one would have to recollect
     Mineral
                       one’s basic knowledge about the structure of the cell and the anatomy of
                       the plant body. We also need to revisit our understanding of diffusion,
     Nutrients
                       besides gaining some knowledge about chemical potential and ions.
11.6 Phloem                 When we talk of the movement of substances we need first to define
     Transport: Flow   what kind of movement we are talking about, and also what substances
     from Source to    we are looking at. In a flowering plant the substances that would need to
     Sink              be transported are water, mineral nutrients, organic nutrients and plant
                       growth regulators. Over small distances substances move by diffusion
                       and by cytoplasmic streaming supplemented by active transport.
                       Transport over longer distances proceeds through the vascular system
                       (the xylem and the phloem) and is called translocation.
                            An important aspect that needs to be considered is the direction of
                       transport. In rooted plants, transport in xylem (of water and minerals) is
                       essentially unidirectional, from roots to the stems. Organic and mineral
                       nutrients however, undergo multidirectional transport. Organic
176                                                                          BIOLOGY


      compounds synthesised in the photosynthetic leaves are exported to all
      other parts of the plant including storage organs. From the storage organs
      they are later re-exported. The mineral nutrients are taken up by the
      roots and transported upwards into the stem, leaves and the growing
      regions. When any plant part undergoes senescence, nutrients may be
      withdrawn from such regions and moved to the growing parts. Hormones
      or plant growth regulators and other chemical stimuli are also transported,
      though in very small amounts, sometimes in a strictly polarised or
      unidirectional manner from where they are synthesised to other parts.
      Hence, in a flowering plant there is a complex traffic of compounds (but
      probably very orderly) moving in different directions, each organ receiving
      some substances and giving out some others.

      11.1 MEANS OF TRANSPORT
      11.1.1 Diffusion
      Movement by diffusion is passive, and may be from one part of the cell to
      the other, or from cell to cell, or over short distances, say, from the inter-
      cellular spaces of the leaf to the outside. No energy expenditure takes place.
      In diffusion, molecules move in a random fashion, the net result being
      substances moving from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower
      concentration. Diffusion is a slow process and is not dependent on a ‘living
      system’. Diffusion is obvious in gases and liquids, but diffusion in solids
      rather than of solids is more likely. Diffusion is very important to plants
      since it is the only means for gaseous movement within the plant body.
          Diffusion rates are affected by the gradient of concentration, the
      permeability of the membrane separating them, temperature and pressure.

      11.1.2 Facilitated Diffusion
      As pointed out earlier, a gradient must already be present for diffusion to
      occur. The diffusion rate depends on the size of the substances; obviously
      smaller substances diffuse faster. The diffusion of any substance across a
      membrane also depends on its solubility in lipids, the major constituent of
      the membrane. Substances soluble in lipids diffuse through the membrane
      faster. Substances that have a hydrophilic moiety, find it difficult to pass
      through the membrane; their movement has to be facilitated. Membrane
      proteins provide sites at which such molecules cross the membrane. They
      do not set up a concentration gradient: a concentration gradient must
      already be present for molecules to diffuse even if facilitated by the proteins.
      This process is called facilitated diffusion.
          In facilitated diffusion special proteins help move substances across
      membranes without expenditure of ATP energy. Facilitated diffusion
      cannot cause net transport of molecules from a low to a high concentration
      – this would require input of energy. Transport rate reaches a maximum
      when all of the protein transporters are being used (saturation). Facilitated
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                      177




                                Figure 11.1 Facilitated diffusion

diffusion is very specific: it allows cell to
select substances for uptake. It is
sensitive to inhibitors which react with
protein side chains.
    The proteins form channels in the
membrane for molecules to pass through.                                              Carrier protein
Some channels are always open; others
can be controlled. Some are large,
allowing a variety of molecules to cross.
The porins are proteins that form huge Uniport A
pores in the outer membranes of the
plastids, mitochondria and some bacteria
allowing molecules up to the size of small
proteins to pass through.
    Figure 11.1 shows an extracellular                A
molecule bound to the transport protein; Antiport                                             B
the transport protein then rotates and
releases the molecule inside the cell, e.g.,
water channels – made up of eight
different types of aquaporins.
                                                      A
                                              Symport
11.1.2.1 Passive symports and                         B
            antiports
Some carrier or transport proteins allow
diffusion only if two types of molecules
move together. In a symport, both
molecules cross the membrane in the same                             Membrane
direction; in an antiport, they move in
opposite directions (Figure 11.2). When a                 Figure 11.2 Facilitated diffusion
178                                                                                 BIOLOGY


               molecule moves across a membrane independent of other molecules, the
               process is called uniport.

               11.1.3 Active Transport
               Active transport uses energy to pump molecules against a concentration
               gradient. Active transport is carried out by membrane-proteins. Hence
               different proteins in the membrane play a major role in both active as well
               as passive transport. Pumps are proteins that use energy to carry
               substances across the cell membrane. These pumps can transport
               substances from a low concentration to a high concentration (‘uphill’
               transport). Transport rate reaches a maximum when all the protein
               transporters are being used or are saturated. Like enzymes the carrier
               protein is very specific in what it carries across the membrane. These
               proteins are sensitive to inhibitors that react with protein side chains.

               11.1.4 Comparison of Different Transport Processes
               Table 11.1 gives a comparison of the different transport mechanisms.
               Proteins in the membrane are responsible for facilitated diffusion and
               active transport and hence show common characterstics of being highly
               selective; they are liable to saturate, respond to inhibitors and are under
               hormonal regulation. But diffusion whether facilitated or not – take place
               only along a gradient and do not use energy.


               TABLE 11.1 Comparison of Different Transport Mechanisms
      Property                                  Simple         Facilitated       Active
                                               Diffusion       Transport        Transport
      Requires special membrane proteins           No               Yes             Yes
      Highly selective                             No               Yes             Yes
      Transport saturates                          No               Yes             Yes
      Uphill transport                             No               No              Yes
      Requires ATP energy                          No               No              Yes


               11.2 PLANT-WATER RELATIONS

               Water is essential for all physiological activities of the plant and plays a
               very important role in all living organisms. It provides the medium in
               which most substances are dissolved. The protoplasm of the cells is
               nothing but water in which different molecules are dissolved and (several
               particles) suspended. A watermelon has over 92 per cent water; most
               herbaceous plants have only about 10 to 15 per cent of its fresh weight
               as dry matter. Of course, distribution of water within a plant varies –
               woody parts have relatively very little water, while soft parts mostly contain
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                         179


water. A seed may appear dry but it still has water – otherwise it would
not be alive and respiring!
    Terrestrial plants take up huge amount water daily but most of it is
lost to the air through evaporation from the leaves, i.e., transpiration. A
mature corn plant absorbs almost three litres of water in a day, while a
mustard plant absorbs water equal to its own weight in about 5 hours.
Because of this high demand for water, it is not surprising that water is
often the limiting factor for plant growth and productivity in both
agricultural and natural environments.


11.2.1 Water Potential
To comprehend plant-water relations, an understanding of certain
standard terms is necessary. Water potential (Ψ            Ψw) is a concept
fundamental to understanding water movement. Solute potential
(Ψ
 Ψs) and pressure potential (Ψ     Ψp) are the two main components that
determine water potential.
    Water molecules possess kinetic energy. In liquid and gaseous form
they are in random motion that is both rapid and constant. The greater
the concentration of water in a system, the greater is its kinetic energy or
‘water potential’. Hence, it is obvious that pure water will have the greatest
water potential. If two systems containing water are in contact, random
movement of water molecules will result in net movement of water
molecules from the system with higher energy to the one with lower energy.
Thus water will move from the system containing water at higher water
potential to the one having low water potential. This process of movement
of substances down a gradient of free energy is called diffusion. Water
potential is denoted by the Greek symbol Psi or Ψ and is expressed in
pressure units such as pascals (Pa). By convention, the water potential
of pure water at standard temperatures, which is not under any pressure,
is taken to be zero.
    If some solute is dissolved in pure water, the solution has fewer free
water and the concentration of water decreases, reducing its water
potential. Hence, all solutions have a lower water potential than pure
water; the magnitude of this lowering due to dissolution of a solute is
called solute potential or Ψs. Ψs is always negative. The more the
solute molecules, the lower (more negative) is the Ψs . For a solution at
atmospheric pressure (water potential) Ψw = (solute potential) Ψs.
    If a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure
water or a solution, its water potential increases. It is equivalent to
pumping water from one place to another. Can you think of any system
in our body where pressure is built up? Pressure can build up in a plant
system when water enters a plant cell due to diffusion causing a pressure
built up against the cell wall, it makes the cell turgid (see section 11.2.2);
 180                                                                                 BIOLOGY


               this increases the pressure potential. Pressure potential is usually
               positive, though in plants negative potential or tension in the water column
               in the xylem plays a major role in water transport up a stem. Pressure
               potential is denoted as Ψp.
                   Water potential of a cell is affected by both solute and pressure
               potential. The relationship between them is as follows:

                                               Ψw = Ψs + Ψp

               11.2.2 Osmosis
               The plant cell is surrounded by a cell membrane and a cell wall. The cell
               wall is freely permeable to water and substances in solution hence is not
               a barrier to movement. In plants the cells usually contain a large central
               vacuole, whose contents, the vacuolar sap, contribute to the solute
               potential of the cell. In plant cells, the cell membrane and the membrane
               of the vacuole, the tonoplast together are important determinants of
               movement of molecules in or out of the cell.
                   Osmosis is the term used to refer specifically to the diffusion of water
               across a differentially- or semi-permeable membrane. Osmosis occurs
               spontaneously in response to a driving force. The net direction and rate of
               osmosis depends on both the pressure gradient and concentration gradient.
               Water will move from its region of higher chemical potential (or concentration)
               to its region of lower chemical potential until equilibrium is reached. At
               equilibrium the two chambers should have the same water potential.
                   You may have made a potato osmometer at some earlier stage in
               school. If the tuber is placed in water, the cavity in the potato tuber
               containing a concentrated solution of sugar collects water due to osmosis.
                   Study Figure 11.3 in which the two chambers, A and B, containing
               solutions are separated by a semi-permeable membrane.
                                                 (a)   Solution of which chamber has a
           A                     B
                                                       lower water potential?
                                                 (b)   Solution of which chamber has a
                                                       lower solute potential?
 Solute                                          (c)   In which direction will osmosis
molecule                                               occur?
                                                 (d)   Which solution has a higher solute
  Water                                                potential?
                                                 (e)   At equilibrium which chamber will
                                                       have lower water potential?
                     Semi-permeable              (f)   If one chamber has a Ψ of – 2000 kPa,
                       membrane                        and the other – 1000 kPa, which is
           Figure 11.3                                 the chamber that has the higher Ψ?
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                      181


    Let us discuss another experiment where a
solution of sucrose in water taken in a funnel is
separated from pure water in a beaker through
a semi-permeable membrane (Figure 11.4). You
can get this kind of a membrane in an egg.
Remove the yolk and albumin through a small
hole at one end of the egg, and place the shell                                      Pressure
in dilute solution of hydrochloric acid for a few
hours. The egg shell dissolves leaving the
membrane intact. Water will move into the funnel,
resulting in rise in the level of the solution in the
funnel. This will continue till the equilibrium is
reached. In case sucrose does diffuse out
through the membrane, will this equilibrium be
ever reached?
                                                                      Sucrose
    External pressure can be applied from the                         solution
upper part of the funnel such that no water
                                                                       Membrane
diffuses into the funnel through the membrane.
This pressure required to prevent water from
diffusing is in fact, the osmotic pressure and this
                                                                      water
is the function of the solute concentration; more
the solute concentration, greater will be the
                                                           (a)                          (b)
pressure required to prevent water from diffusing
in. Numerically osmotic pressure is equivalent          Figure 11.4 A demonstration of osmosis. A
to the osmotic potential, but the sign is                           thistle funnel is filled with
opposite.Osmotic pressure is the positive                           sucrose solution and kept
pressure applied, while osmotic potential is                        inverted in a beaker containing
                                                                    water. (a) Water will diffuse
negative.
                                                                    across the membrane (as
                                                                    shown by arrows) to raise the
11.2.3 Plasmolysis                                                  level of the solution in the
                                                                    funnel (b) Pressure can be
The behaviour of the plant cells (or tissues) with                  applied as shown to stop the
regard to water movement depends on the                             water movement into the
surrounding solution. If the external solution                      funnel
balances the osmotic pressure of the cytoplasm,
it is said to be isotonic. If the external solution
is more dilute than the cytoplasm, it is
hypotonic and if the external solution is more
concentrated, it is hypertonic. Cells swell in
hypotonic solutions and shrink in hypertonic
ones.
     Plasmolysis occurs when water moves out of
the cell and the cell membrane of a plant cell
shrinks away from its cell wall. This occurs when
182                                                                                 BIOLOGY




      Figure 11.5 Plant cell plasmolysis

           the cell (or tissue) is placed in a solution that is hypertonic (has more solutes)
           to the protoplasm. Water moves out; it is first lost from the cytoplasm and
           then from the vacuole. The water when drawn out of the cell through
           diffusion into the extracellular (outside cell) fluid causes the protoplast to
           shrink away from the walls. The cell is said to be plasmolysed. The movement
           of water occurred across the membrane moving from an area of high water
           potential (i.e., the cell) to an area of lower water potential outside the cell
           (Figure 11.5).
               What occupies the space between the cell wall and the shrunken
           protoplast in the plasmolysed cell?
               When the cell (or tissue) is placed in an isotonic solution, there is no
           net flow of water towards the inside or outside. If the external solution
           balances the osmotic pressure of the cytoplasm it is said to be isotonic.
           When water flows into the cell and out of the cell and are in equilibrium,
           the cells are said to be flaccid.
               The process of plasmolysis is usually reversible. When the cells are
           placed in a hypotonic solution (higher water potential or dilute solution
           as compared to the cytoplasm), water diffuses into the cell causing the
           cytoplasm to build up a pressure against the wall, that is called turgor
           pressure. The pressure exerted by the protoplasts due to entry of water
           against the rigid walls is called pressure potential Ψp.. Because of the
           rigidity of the cell wall, the cell does not rupture. This turgor pressure is
           ultimately responsible for enlargement and extension growth of cells.
              What would be the Ψp of a flaccid cell? Which organisms other than
           plants possess cell wall ?

           11.2.4 Imbibition
           Imbibition is a special type of diffusion when water is absorbed by solids
           – colloids – causing them to enormously increase in volume. The classical
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                         183


examples of imbibition are absorption of water by seeds and dry wood.
The pressure that is produced by the swelling of wood had been used by
prehistoric man to split rocks and boulders. If it were not for the pressure
due to imbibition, seedlings would not have been able to emerge out of
the soil into the open; they probably would not have been able to establish!
    Imbibition is also diffusion since water movement is along a
concentration gradient; the seeds and other such materials have almost no
water hence they absorb water easily. Water potential gradient between
the absorbent and the liquid imbibed is essential for imbibition. In addition,
for any substance to imbibe any liquid, affinity between the adsorbant and
the liquid is also a pre-requisite.


11.3 LONG DISTANCE TRANSPORT OF WATER

At some earlier stage you might have carried out an experiment where
you had placed a twig bearing white flowers in coloured water and had
watched it turn colour. On examining the cut end of the twig after a few
hours you had noted the region through which the coloured water moved.
That experiment very easily demonstrates that the path of water movement
is through the vascular bundles, more specifically, the xylem. Now we
have to go further and try and understand the mechanism of movement
of water and other substances up a plant.
    Long distance transport of substances within a plant cannot be by
diffusion alone. Diffusion is a slow process. It can account for only short
distance movement of molecules. For example, the movement of a molecule
across a typical plant cell (about 50 µm) takes approximately 2.5 s. At this
rate, can you calculate how many years it would take for the movement
of molecules over a distance of 1 m within a plant by diffusion alone?
    In large and complex organisms, often substances have to be moved
across very large distances. Sometimes the sites of production or
absorption and sites of storage are too far from each other; diffusion or
active transport would not suffice. Special long distance transport systems
become necessary so as to move substances across long distances and at
a much faster rate. Water and minerals, and food are generally moved by
a mass or bulk flow system. Mass flow is the movement of substances in
bulk or en masse from one point to another as a result of pressure
differences between the two points. It is a characteristic of mass flow that
substances, whether in solution or in suspension, are swept along at the
same pace, as in a flowing river. This is unlike diffusion where different
substances move independently depending on their concentration
gradients. Bulk flow can be achieved either through a positive hydrostatic
pressure gradient (e.g., a garden hose) or a negative hydrostatic pressure
gradient (e.g., suction through a straw).
184                                                                        BIOLOGY


          The bulk movement of substances through the conducting or vascular
      tissues of plants is called translocation.
          Do you remember studying cross sections of roots, stems and leaves
      of higher plants and studying the vascular system? The higher plants
      have highly specialised vascular tissues – xylem and phloem. Xylem is
      associated with translocation of mainly water, mineral salts, some organic
      nitrogen and hormones, from roots to the aerial parts of the plants. The
      phloem translocates a variety of organic and inorganic solutes, mainly
      from the leaves to other parts of the plants.

      11.3.1 How do Plants Absorb Water?
      We know that the roots absorb most of the water that goes into plants;
      obviously that is why we apply water to the soil and not on the leaves.
      The responsibility of absorption of water and minerals is more specifically
      the function of the root hairs that are present in millions at the tips of the
      roots. Root hairs are thin-walled slender extensions of root epidermal
      cells that greatly increase the surface area for absorption. Water is
      absorbed along with mineral solutes, by the root hairs, purely by diffusion.
      Once water is absorbed by the root hairs, it can move deeper into root
      layers by two distinct pathways:
        • apoplast pathway
        • symplast pathway
          The apoplast is the system of adjacent cell walls that is continuous
      throughout the plant, except at the casparian strips of the endodermis
      in the roots (Figure 11.6). The apoplastic movement of water occurs
      exclusively through the intercellular spaces and the walls of the cells.
      Movement through the apoplast does not involve crossing the cell




      Figure 11.6 Pathway of water movement in the root
    TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                    185


membrane. This movement is dependent on the gradient. The apoplast
does not provide any barrier to water movement and water movement is
through mass flow. As water evaporates into the intercellular spaces or
the atmosphere, tension develop in the continuous stream of water in the
apoplast, hence mass flow of water occurs due to the adhesive and cohesive
properties of water.
     The symplastic system is the system of interconnected protoplasts.
Neighbouring cells are connected through cytoplasmic strands that
extend through plasmodesmata. During symplastic movement, the water
travels through the cells – their cytoplasm; intercellular movement is
through the plasmodesmata. Water has to enter the cells through the
cell membrane, hence the movement is relatively slower. Movement is again
down a potential gradient. Symplastic movement may be aided by
cytoplasmic streaming. You may have observed cytoplasmic streaming
in cells of the Hydrilla leaf; the movement of chloroplast due to streaming
is easily visible.
     Most of the water flow in the roots occurs via the apoplast since the
cortical cells are loosely packed, and hence offer no resistance to water
movement. However, the inner boundary of the cortex, the endodermis,
is impervious to water because of a band of suberised matrix called the
casparian strip. Water molecules are unable to penetrate the layer, so
they are directed to wall regions that are not suberised, into the cells
proper through the membranes. The water then moves through the
symplast and again crosses a membrane to reach the cells of the xylem.
The movement of water through the root layers is ultimately symplastic
in the endodermis. This is the only
way water and other solutes can
                                                                        Endodermis       Xylem
enter the vascular cylinder.
     Once inside the xylem, water is
again free to move between cells as         Symplastic
well as through them. In young                  path
roots, water enters directly into the
xylem vessels and/or tracheids.
These are non-living conduits and
so are parts of the apoplast. The
path of water and mineral ions into
the root vascular system is
summarised in Figure 11.7.
     Some plants have additional                                           Casparian      Phloem
                                               Apoplastic       Cortex        strip
structures associated with them                   path                              Pericycle
that help in water (and mineral)
absorption. A mycorrhiza is a             Figure 11.7 Symplastic and apoplastic pathways of
symbiotic association of a fungus                        water and ion absorption and movement in
with a root system. The fungal                           roots
186                                                                     BIOLOGY


      filaments form a network around the young root or they penetrate the
      root cells. The hyphae have a very large surface area that absorb mineral
      ions and water from the soil from a much larger volume of soil that perhaps
      a root cannot do. The fungus provides minerals and water to the roots, in
      turn the roots provide sugars and N-containing compounds to the
      mycorrhizae. Some plants have an obligate association with the
      mycorrhizae. For example, Pinus seeds cannot germinate and establish
      without the presence of mycorrhizae.

      11.3.2 Water Movement up a Plant
      We looked at how plants absorb water from the soil, and move it into the
      vascular tissues. We now have to try and understand how this water is
      transported to various parts of the plant. Is the water movement active, or
      is it still passive? Since the water has to be moved up a stem against
      gravity, what provides the energy for this?

      11.3.2.1    Root Pressure
      As various ions from the soil are actively transported into the vascular
      tissues of the roots, water follows (its potential gradient) and increases
      the pressure inside the xylem. This positive pressure is called root
      pressure, and can be responsible for pushing up water to small heights
      in the stem. How can we see that root pressure exists? Choose a small
      soft-stemmed plant and on a day, when there is plenty of atmospheric
      moisture, cut the stem horizontally near the base with a sharp blade,
      early in the morning. You will soon see drops of solution ooze out of the
      cut stem; this comes out due to the positive root pressure. If you fix a
      rubber tube to the cut stem as a sleeve you can actually collect and
      measure the rate of exudation, and also determine the composition of the
      exudates. Effects of root pressure is also observable at night and early
      morning when evaporation is low, and excess water collects in the form of
      droplets around special openings of veins near the tip of grass blades,
      and leaves of many herbaceous parts. Such water loss in its liquid phase
      is known as guttation.
          Root pressure can, at best, only provide a modest push in the overall
      process of water transport. They obviously do not play a major role in
      water movement up tall trees. The greatest contribution of root pressure
      may be to re-establish the continuous chains of water molecules in the
      xylem which often break under the enormous tensions created by
      transpiration. Root pressure does not account for the majority of water
      transport; most plants meet their need by transpiratory pull.
      11.3.2.2    Transpiration pull
      Despite the absence of a heart or a circulatory system in plants, the flow
      of water upward through the xylem in plants can achieve fairly high rates,
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                    187


up to 15 metres per hour. How is this movement accomplished? A long
standing question is, whether water is ‘pushed’ or ‘pulled’ through the
plant. Most researchers agree that water is mainly ‘pulled’ through the
plant, and that the driving force for this process is transpiration from the
leaves. This is referred to as the cohesion-tension-transpiration pull
model of water transport. But, what generates this transpirational pull?
    Water is transient in plants. Less than 1 per cent of the water reaching
the leaves is used in photosynthesis and plant growth. Most of it is lost
through the stomata in the leaves. This water loss is known as
transpiration.
    You have studied transpiration in an earlier class by enclosing a healthy
plant in polythene bag and observing the droplets of water formed inside
the bag. You could also study water loss from a leaf using cobalt chloride
paper, which turns colour on absorbing water.


11.4 TRANSPIRATION

Transpiration is the evaporative loss of water by plants. It occurs mainly
through the stomata in the leaves. Besides the loss of water vapour in
transpiration, exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the leaf also
occurs through pores called stomata (sing. : stoma). Normally stomata
are open in the day time and close during the night. The immediate cause
of the opening or closing of the stomata is a change in the turgidity of the
guard cells. The inner wall of each guard cell, towards the pore or stomatal
aperture, is thick and elastic. When turgidity increases within the two
guard cells flanking each stomatal aperture or pore, the thin outer walls
bulge out and force the inner walls into a crescent shape. The opening of
the stoma is also aided due to the orientation of the microfibrils in the cell
walls of the guard cells. Cellulose microfibrils are oriented radially rather
than longitudinally making it easier for the stoma to open. When the
guard cells lose turgor, due to water loss (or water stress) the elastic inner
walls regain their original shape, the guard cells become flaccid and the
stoma closes.
    Usually the lower surface of a
dorsiventral (often dicotyledonous) leaf
has a greater number of stomata while in
an isobilateral (often monocotyledonous)
leaf they are about equal on both surfaces.
Transpiration is affected by several
external factors: temperature, light,
humidity, wind speed. Plant factors that
affect transpiration include number and
distribution of stomata, per cent of open          Figure11.8 A stomatal aperture with guard cells
188                                                                                   BIOLOGY


              stomata, water status of the plant, canopy structure etc.
                  The transpiration driven ascent of xylem sap depends mainly on the
              following physical properties of water:
                  • Cohesion – mutual attraction between water molecules.
                  • Adhesion – attraction of water molecules to polar surfaces (such
                    as the surface of tracheary elements).
                  • Surface Tension – water molecules are attracted to each other in
                    the liquid phase more than to water in the gas phase.
                  These properties give water high tensile strength, i.e., an ability to
              resist a pulling force, and high capillarity, i.e., the ability to rise in thin
              tubes. In plants capillarity is aided by the small diameter of the tracheary
              elements – the tracheids and vessel elements.
                  The process of photosynthesis requires water. The system of xylem
              vessels from the root to the leaf vein can supply the needed water. But
              what force does a plant use to move water molecules into the leaf
              parenchyma cells where they are needed? As water evaporates through
              the stomata, since the thin film of water over the cells is continuous, it
              results in pulling of water, molecule by molecule, into the leaf from the
              xylem. Also, because of lower concentration of water vapour in the
              atmosphere as compared to the substomatal cavity and intercellular
              spaces, water diffuses into the surrounding air. This creates a ‘pull’
              (Figure 11.9).
                  Measurements reveal that the forces generated by transpiration can
              create pressures sufficient to lift a xylem sized column of water over 130
              metres high.




                                                                          Palisade
                  Xylem


                 Phloem




                                                                         Guard Cell
                                 Diffusion into            Stomatal
                                                           Stoma
                                                             pore
                                surrounding air


      Figure11.9 Water movement in the leaf. Evaporation from the leaf sets up
                 a pressure gradient between the outside air and the air spaces of the
                 leaf. The gradient is transmitted into the photosynthetic cells and on
                 the water-filled xylem in the leaf vein.
      TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                       189


11.4.1 Transpiration and Photosynthesis – a Compromise
Transpiration has more than one purpose; it
  •   creates transpiration pull for absorption and transport of plants
  •   supplies water for photosynthesis
  •   transports minerals from the soil to all parts of the plant
  •   cools leaf surfaces, sometimes 10 to 15 degrees, by evaporative
      cooling
   • maintains the shape and structure of the plants by keeping cells
      turgid
    An actively photosynthesising plant has an insatiable need for water.
Photosynthesis is limited by available water which can be swiftly depleted
by transpiration. The humidity of rainforests is largely due to this vast
cycling of water from root to leaf to atmosphere and back to the soil.
    The evolution of the C4 photosynthetic system is probably one of the
strategies for maximising the availability of CO2 while minimising water
loss. C4 plants are twice as efficient as C3 plants in terms of fixing carbon
(making sugar). However, a C4 plant loses only half as much water as a C3
plant for the same amount of CO2 fixed.

11.5 UPTAKE AND TRANSPORT OF MINERAL NUTRIENTS
Plants obtain their carbon and most of their oxygen from CO2 in the
atmosphere. However, their remaining nutritional requirements are
obtained from minerals and water for hydrogen in the soil.

11.5.1 Uptake of Mineral Ions
Unlike water, all minerals cannot be passively absorbed by the roots.
Two factors account for this: (i) minerals are present in the soil as charged
particles (ions) which cannot move across cell membranes and (ii) the
concentration of minerals in the soil is usually lower than the concentration
of minerals in the root. Therefore, most minerals must enter the root by
active absorption into the cytoplasm of epidermal cells. This needs energy
in the form of ATP. The active uptake of ions is partly responsible for the
water potential gradient in roots, and therefore for the uptake of water by
osmosis. Some ions also move into the epidermal cells passively.
    Ions are absorbed from the soil by both passive and active transport.
Specific proteins in the membranes of root hair cells actively pump ions
from the soil into the cytoplasms of the epidermal cells. Like all cells, the
endodermal cells have many transport proteins embedded in their plasma
membrane; they let some solutes cross the membrane, but not others.
Transport proteins of endodermal cells are control points, where a plant
adjusts the quantity and types of solutes that reach the xylem. Note
that the root endodermis because of the layer of suberin has the ability to
actively transport ions in one direction only.
190                                                                       BIOLOGY


      11.5.2 Translocation of Mineral Ions
      After the ions have reached xylem through active or passive uptake, or a
      combination of the two, their further transport up the stem to all parts of
      the plant is through the transpiration stream.
          The chief sinks for the mineral elements are the growing regions of the
      plant, such as the apical and lateral meristems, young leaves, developing
      flowers, fruits and seeds, and the storage organs. Unloading of mineral
      ions occurs at the fine vein endings through diffusion and active uptake
      by these cells.
          Mineral ions are frequently remobilised, particularly from older,
      senescing parts. Older dying leaves export much of their mineral content
      to younger leaves. Similarly, before leaf fall in decidous plants, minerals
      are removed to other parts. Elements most readily mobilised are
      phosphorus, sulphur, nitrogen and potassium. Some elements that are
      structural components like calcium are not remobilised.
          An analysis of the xylem exudates shows that though some of the
      nitrogen travels as inorganic ions, much of it is carried in the organic
      form as amino acids and related compounds. Similarly, small amounts
      of P and S are carried as organic compounds. In addition, small amount
      of exchange of materials does take place between xylem and phloem.
      Hence, it is not that we can clearly make a distinction and say categorically
      that xylem transports only inorganic nutrients while phloem transports
      only organic materials, as was traditionally believed.

      11.6 PHLOEM TRANSPORT: FLOW FROM SOURCE TO SINK

      Food, primarily sucrose, is transported by the vascular tissue phloem
      from a source to a sink. Usually the source is understood to be that
      part of the plant which synthesises the food, i.e., the leaf, and sink, the
      part that needs or stores the food. But, the source and sink may be
      reversed depending on the season, or the plant’s needs. Sugar stored
      in roots may be mobilised to become a source of food in the early spring
      when the buds of trees, act as sink; they need energy for growth and
      development of the photosynthetic apparatus. Since the source-sink
      relationship is variable, the direction of movement in the phloem can
      be upwards or downwards, i.e., bi-directional. This contrasts with
      that of the xylem where the movement is always unidirectional, i.e.,
      upwards. Hence, unlike one-way flow of water in transpiration, food
      in phloem sap can be transported in any required direction so long
      as there is a source of sugar and a sink able to use, store or remove
      the sugar.
          Phloem sap is mainly water and sucrose, but other sugars, hormones
      and amino acids are also transported or translocated through phloem.
     TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                         191


11.6.1 The Pressure Flow or Mass Flow Hypothesis
The accepted mechanism used for the translocation of sugars from source
to sink is called the pressure flow hypothesis. (see Figure 11.10). As
glucose is prepared at the source (by photosynthesis) it is converted to
sucrose (a dissacharide). The sugar is then moved in the form of sucrose
into the companion cells and then into the living phloem sieve tube cells
by active transport. This process of loading at the source produces a
hypertonic condition in the phloem. Water in the adjacent xylem moves
into the phloem by osmosis. As osmotic pressure builds up the phloem
sap will move to areas of lower pressure. At the sink osmotic pressure
must be reduced. Again active transport is necessary to move the sucrose
out of the phloem sap and into the cells which will use the sugar –
converting it into energy, starch, or cellulose. As sugars are removed, the
osmotic pressure decreases and water moves out of the phloem.
    To summarise, the movement of sugars in the phloem begins at the
source, where sugars are loaded (actively transported) into a sieve tube.
Loading of the phloem sets up a water potential gradient that facilitates
the mass movement in the phloem.
    Phloem tissue is composed of sieve tube cells, which form long columns
with holes in their end walls called sieve plates. Cytoplasmic strands pass
through the holes in the sieve plates, so forming continuous filaments. As
hydrostatic pressure in the phloem sieve tube increases, pressure flow
begins, and the sap moves through the phloem. Meanwhile, at the sink,
incoming sugars are actively transported out of the phloem and removed

                             Sugars leave sieve tubes;
                             water follows by osmosis


       Tip of stem




              Sugar solution flows                        Sugars enter sieve tubes;    =High
                to regions of low                         water follows by osmosis     turgor
                turgor pressure                                                       pressure
                                               Phloem
                                                         Sugars leave sieve tube
                                                           for metabolism and
                                                          storage; water follows
                                                               by osmosis



                                                         Root

             Figure11.10 Diagrammatic presentation of mechanism of translocation
192                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                      as complex carbohydrates. The loss of solute produces a high water
                      potential in the phloem, and water passes out, returning eventually to xylem.
                          A simple experiment, called girdling, was used to identify the tissues
                      through which food is transported. On the trunk of a tree a ring of bark
                      up to a depth of the phloem layer, can be carefully removed. In the absence
                      of downward movement of food the portion of the bark above the ring on
                      the stem becomes swollen after a few weeks. This simple experiment
                      shows that phloem is the tissue responsible for translocation of food; and
                      that transport takes place in one direction, i.e., towards the roots. This
                      experiment can be performed by you easily.



                                             SUMMARY

      Plants obtain a variety of inorganic elements (ions) and salts from their
      surroundings especially from water and soil. The movement of these nutrients
      from environment into the plant as well as from one plant cell to another plant cell
      essentially involves movement across a cell membrane. Transport across cell
      membrane can be through diffusion, facilitated transport or active transport. Water
      and minerals absorbed by roots are transported by xylem and the organic material
      synthesised in the leaves is transported to other parts of plant through phloem.
          Passive transport (diffusion, osmosis) and active transport are the two modes
      of nutrient transport across cell membranes in living organisms. In passive
      transport, nutrients move across the membrane by diffusion, without any use of
      energy as it is always down the concentration gradient and hence entropy driven.
      This diffusion of substances depends on their size, solubility in water or organic
      solvents. Osmosis is the special type of diffusion of water across a semi-permeable
      membrane which depends on pressure gradient and concentration gradient. In
      active transport, energy in the form of ATP is utilised to pump molecules against
      a concentration gradient across membranes. Water potential is the potential energy
      of water which helps in the movement of water. It is determined by solute potential
      and pressure potential. The behaviour of the cells depends on the surrounding
      solution. If the surrounding solution of the cell is hypertonic, it gets plasmolysed.
      The absorption of water by seeds and drywood takes place by a special type of
      diffusion called imbibition.
          In higher plants, there is a vascular system, xylem and phloem, responsible
      for translocation. Water minerals and food cannot be moved within the body of a
      plant by diffusion alone. They are therefore, transported by a mass flow system –
      movement of substance in bulk from one point to another as a result of pressure
      differences between the two points.
          Water absorbed by root hairs moves deeper into the root by two distinct
      pathways, i.e., apoplast and symplast. Various ions, and water from soil can be
      transported upto a small height in stems by root pressure. Transpiration pull
      model is the most acceptable to explain the transport of water. Transpiration is
TRANSPORT IN PLANTS                                                                      193


  the loss of water in the form of vapours from the plant parts through stomata.
  Temperature, light, humidity, wind speed and number of stomata affect the rate
  of transpiration. Excess water is also removed through tips of leaves of plants by
  guttation.
      Phloem is responsible for transport of food (primarily) sucrose from the source
  to the sink. The translocation in phloem is bi-directional; the source-sink
  relationship is variable. The translocation in phloem is explained by the pressure-
  flow hypothesis.



                                        EXERCISES

   1. What are the factors affecting the rate of diffusion?
   2. What are porins? What role do they play in diffusion?
   3. Describe the role played by protein pumps during active transport in plants.
   4. Explain why pure water has the maximum water potential.
   5. Differentiate between the following:
       (a)   Diffusion and Osmosis
       (b)   Transpiration and Evaporation
       (c)   Osmotic Pressure and Osmotic Potential
       (d)   Imbibition and Diffusion
       (e)   Apoplast and Symplast pathways of movement of water in plants.
       (f)   Guttation and Transpiration.
   6. Briefly describe water potential. What are the factors affecting it?
   7. What happens when a pressure greater than the atmospheric pressure is applied
      to pure water or a solution?
   8. (a) With the help of well-labelled diagrams, describe the process of plasmolysis
          in plants, giving appropriate examples.
      (b) Explain what will happen to a plant cell if it is kept in a solution having
          higher water potential.
   9. How is the mycorrhizal association helpful in absorption of water and minerals
      in plants?
  10. What role does root pressure play in water movement in plants?
  11. Describe transpiration pull model of water transport in plants. What are the
      factors influencing transpiration? How is it useful to plants?
  12. Discuss the factors responsible for ascent of xylem sap in plants.
  13. What essential role does the root endodermis play during mineral absorption in
      plants?
  14. Explain why xylem transport is unidirectional and phloem transport
      bi-directional.
  15. Explain pressure flow hypothesis of translocation of sugars in plants.
  16. What causes the opening and closing of guard cells of stomata during
      transpiration?
                           UNIT 5
                           HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY

Chapter 16              The reductionist approach to study of life forms resulted in increasing
Digestion and Absorptionuse of physico-chemical concepts and techniques. Majority of these
                        studies employed either surviving tissue model or straightaway cell-
Chapter 17              free systems. An explosion of knowledge resulted in molecular biology.
Breathing and Exchange  Molecular physiology became almost synonymous with biochemistry
of Gases                and biophysics. However, it is now being increasingly realised that
                        neither a purely organismic approach nor a purely reductionistic
Chapter 18              molecular approach would reveal the truth about biological processes
Body Fluids and         or living phenomena. Systems biology makes us believe that all living
Circulation             phenomena are emergent properties due to interaction among
                        components of the system under study. Regulatory network of molecules,
Chapter 19              supra molecular assemblies, cells, tissues, organisms and indeed,
Excretory Products and  populations and communities, each create emergent properties. In the
their Elimination       chapters under this unit, major human physiological processes like
                        digestion, exchange of gases, blood circulation, locomotion and
Chapter 20              movement are described in cellular and molecular terms. The last two
Locomotion and Movement chapters point to the coordination and regulation of body events at the
                        organismic level.
Chapter 21
Neural Control and
Coordination

Chapter 22
Chemical Coordination
and Integration
                ALFONSO CORTI, Italian anatomist, was born in 1822. Corti began
                his scientific career studying the cardiovascular systems of
                reptiles. Later, he turned his attention to the mammalian
                auditory system. In 1851, he published a paper describing a
                structure located on the basilar membrane of the cochlea
                containing hair cells that convert sound vibrations into nerve
                impulses, the organ of Corti. He died in the year 1888.




Alfonso Corti
(1822 – 1888)
                         CHAPTER 16
                         DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
16.1 Digestive       Food is one of the basic requirements of all living organisms. The major
     System          components of our food are carbohydrates, proteins and fats. Vitamins
16.2 Digestion of    and minerals are also required in small quantities. Food provides energy
     Food            and organic materials for growth and repair of tissues. The water we take
                     in, plays an important role in metabolic processes and also prevents
16.3 Absorption of
                     dehydration of the body. Biomacromolecules in food cannot be utilised
     Digested
     Products
                     by our body in their original form. They have to be broken down and
                     converted into simple substances in the digestive system. This process of
16.4 Disorders of    conversion of complex food substances to simple absorbable forms is
     Digestive
                     called digestion and is carried out by our digestive system by mechanical
     System
                     and biochemical methods. General organisation of the human digestive
                     system is shown in Figure 16.1.


                     16.1 DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

                     The human digestive system consists of the alimentary canal and the
                     associated glands.

                     16.1.1 Alimentary Canal
                     The alimentary canal begins with an anterior opening – the mouth, and it
                     opens out posteriorly through the anus. The mouth leads to the buccal
                     cavity or oral cavity. The oral cavity has a number of teeth and a muscular
                     tongue. Each tooth is embedded in a socket of jaw bone (Figure16.2).
                     This type of attachment is called thecodont. Majority of mammals
                     including human being forms two sets of teeth during their life, a set of
258                                                                                 BIOLOGY




              Oral cavity
                                                                 Parotid gland
                  Mouth
                                                                 Pharynx
       Submaxillary and
       sublingual glands


                                                                 Oesophagus

                    Liver

             Gall bladder                                         Stomach


                                                                  Pancreas
              Duodenum

         Transverse colon                                        Jejunum

         Ascending colon
                                                                 Descending colon
                    Ileum

                 Caecum
                                                                  Rectum
      Vermiform appendix
                                                  Anus


                       Figure 16.1 The human digestive system


                  temporary milk or deciduous teeth replaced by a set of permanent or
                  adult teeth. This type of dentition is called diphyodont. An adult human
                  has 32 permanent teeth which are of four different types (Heterodont
                  dentition), namely, incisors (I), canine (C), premolars (PM) and molars
                  (M). Arrangement of teeth in each half of the upper and lower jaw in the
                  order I, C, PM, M is represented by a dental formula which in human
                     2123
                  is       . The hard chewing surface of the teeth, made up of enamel, helps
                     2123
                  in the mastication of food. The tongue is a freely movable muscular organ
                  attached to the floor of the oral cavity by the frenulum. The upper surface
                  of the tongue has small projections called papillae, some of which bear
                  taste buds.
                      The oral cavity leads into a short pharynx which serves as a common
                  passage for food and air. The oesophagus and the trachea (wind pipe)
    DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION                                                              259


open into the pharynx. A cartilaginous flap
called epiglottis prevents the entry of food
into the glottis – opening of the wind pipe –
during swallowing. The oesophagus is a
thin, long tube which extends posteriorly
passing through the neck, thorax and
diaphragm and leads to a ‘J’ shaped bag like
structure called stomach. A muscular
sphincter (gastro-oesophageal) regulates the
opening of oesophagus into the stomach.
The stomach, located in the upper left
portion of the abdominal cavity, has three
major parts – a cardiac portion into which
the oesophagus opens, a fundic region and       Figure 16.2   Arrangement of different types of
                                                              teeth in the jaws on one side and
a pyloric portion which opens into the first                  the sockets on the other side
part of small intestine (Figure 16.3). Small
intestine is distinguishable into three
regions, a ‘C’ shaped duodenum, a long
coiled middle portion jejunum and a highly
coiled ileum. The opening of the stomach
into the duodenum is guarded by the pyloric
sphincter. Ileum opens into the large
intestine. It consists of caecum, colon and
rectum. Caecum is a small blind sac which
hosts some symbiotic micro-organisms. A
narrow finger-like tubular projection, the
vermiform appendix which is a vestigial
organ, arises from the caecum. The caecum
opens into the colon. The colon is divided
into three parts – an ascending, a transverse
and a descending part. The descending part
opens into the rectum which opens out
                                                    Figure 16.3 Anatomical regions of human
through the anus.                                               stomach
    The wall of alimentary canal from
oesophagus to rectum possesses four layers
(Figure 16.4) namely serosa, muscularis,
sub-mucosa and mucosa. Serosa is the
outermost layer and is made up of a thin
mesothelium (epithelium of visceral organs)
with some connective tissues. Muscularis is
formed by smooth muscles usually
arranged into an inner circular and an outer
longitudinal layer. An oblique muscle layer
may be present in some regions. The sub-
mucosal layer is formed of loose connective
260                                                                                      BIOLOGY




  Figure 16.4 Diagrammatic representation of transverse section of gut


                                               tissues containing nerves, blood and lymph
                                               vessels. In duodenum, glands are also present in
                                               sub-mucosa. The innermost layer lining the
                                               lumen of the alimentary canal is the mucosa. This
                                Villi          layer forms irregular folds (rugae) in the stomach
                                Lacteal        and small finger-like foldings called villi in the
                                               small intestine (Figure 16.5). The cells lining the
                                               villi produce numerous microscopic projections
                                               called microvilli giving a brush border
                                 Capillaries   appearance. These modifications increase the
                                               surface area enormously. Villi are supplied with
                                  Artery
                                               a network of capillaries and a large lymph vessel
                                  Crypts
                                               called the lacteal. Mucosal epithelium has goblet
                                  Vein         cells which secrete mucus that help in lubrication.
                                               Mucosa also forms glands in the stomach (gastric
Figure 16.5   A section of small intestinal
              mucosa showing villi             glands) and crypts in between the bases of villi in
                                               the intestine (crypts of Lieberkuhn). All the four
                                               layers show modifications in different parts of the
                                               alimentary canal.

                     16.1.2 Digestive Glands
                     The digestive glands associated with the alimentary canal include the
                     salivary glands, the liver and the pancreas.
                         Saliva is mainly produced by three pairs of salivary glands, the parotids
                     (cheek), the sub-maxillary/sub-mandibular (lower jaw) and the sub-
                     linguals (below the tongue). These glands situated just outside the buccal
                     cavity secrete salivary juice into the buccal cavity.
    DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION                                                                  261


    Liver is the largest gland of the body weighing about 1.2 to 1.5 kg in
an adult human. It is situated in the abdominal cavity, just below the
diaphragm and has two lobes. The hepatic lobules are the structural and
functional units of liver containing hepatic cells arranged in the form of
cords. Each lobule is covered by a thin connective tissue sheath called
the Glisson’s capsule. The bile secreted by the hepatic cells passes through
the hepatic ducts and is stored and concentrated in a thin muscular sac
called the gall bladder. The duct of gall bladder (cystic duct) along with
the hepatic duct from the liver forms the common bile duct (Figure 16.6).




                           Figure 16.6 The duct systems of liver, gall bladder and pancreas


The bile duct and the pancreatic duct open together into the duodenum
as the common hepato-pancreatic duct which is guarded by a sphincter
called the sphincter of Oddi.
    The pancreas is a compound (both exocrine and endocrine) elongated
organ situated between the limbs of the ‘U’ shaped duodenum. The
exocrine portion secretes an alkaline pancreatic juice containing enzymes
and the endocrine portion secretes hormones, insulin and glucagon.


16.2 DIGESTION       OF   FOOD

The process of digestion is accomplished by mechanical and chemical
processes.
   The buccal cavity performs two major functions, mastication of food
and facilitation of swallowing. The teeth and the tongue with the help of
262                                                                     BIOLOGY


      saliva masticate and mix up the food thoroughly. Mucus in saliva helps
      in lubricating and adhering the masticated food particles into a bolus.
      The bolus is then conveyed into the pharynx and then into the oesophagus
      by swallowing or deglutition. The bolus further passes down through
      the oesophagus by successive waves of muscular contractions called
      peristalsis. The gastro-oesophageal sphincter controls the passage of food
      into the stomach.The saliva secreted into the oral cavity contains
      electrolytes                       and enzymes, salivary amylase and
      lysozyme. The chemical process of digestion is initiated in the oral cavity
      by the hydrolytic action of the carbohydrate splitting enzyme, the salivary
      amylase. About 30 per cent of starch is hydrolysed here by this enzyme
      (optimum pH 6.8) into a disaccharide – maltose. Lysozyme present in
      saliva acts as an antibacterial agent that prevents infections.
                                     Salivary Amylase
                           Starch 
                                          → Maltose
                                         pH 6.8

         The mucosa of stomach has gastric glands. Gastric glands have three
      major types of cells namely -
           (i) mucus neck cells which secrete mucus;
          (ii) peptic or chief cells which secrete the proenzyme pepsinogen; and
         (iii) parietal or oxyntic cells which secrete HCl and intrinsic factor
               (factor essential for absorption of vitamin B12).
           The stomach stores the food for 4-5 hours. The food mixes thoroughly
      with the acidic gastric juice of the stomach by the churning movements
      of its muscular wall and is called the chyme. The proenzyme pepsinogen,
      on exposure to hydrochloric acid gets converted into the active enzyme
      pepsin, the proteolytic enzyme of the stomach. Pepsin converts proteins
      into proteoses and peptones (peptides). The mucus and bicarbonates
      present in the gastric juice play an important role in lubrication and
      protection of the mucosal epithelium from excoriation by the highly
      concentrated hydrochloric acid. HCl provides the acidic pH (pH 1.8)
      optimal for pepsins. Rennin is a proteolytic enzyme found in gastric juice
      of infants which helps in the digestion of milk proteins. Small amounts of
      lipases are also secreted by gastric glands.
           Various types of movements are generated by the muscularis layer of
      the small intestine. These movements help in a thorough mixing up of
      the food with various secretions in the intestine and thereby facilitate
      digestion. The bile, pancreatic juice and the intestinal juice are the
      secretions released into the small intestine. Pancreatic juice and bile are
      released through the hepato-pancreatic duct. The pancreatic juice
      contains inactive enzymes – trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen,
      procarboxypeptidases, amylases, lipases and nucleases. Trypsinogen is
      activated by an enzyme, enterokinase, secreted by the intestinal mucosa
     DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION                                                      263


into active trypsin, which in turn activates the other enzymes in the
pancreatic juice. The bile released into the duodenum contains bile
pigments (bilirubin and bili-verdin), bile salts, cholesterol and
phospholipids but no enzymes. Bile helps in emulsification of fats, i.e.,
breaking down of the fats into very small micelles. Bile also activates lipases.
    The intestinal mucosal epithelium has goblet cells which secrete mucus.
The secretions of the brush border cells of the mucosa alongwith the
secretions of the goblet cells constitute the intestinal juice or
succus entericus. This juice contains a variety of enzymes like
disaccharidases (e.g., maltase), dipeptidases, lipases, nucleosidases, etc.
The mucus alongwith the bicarbonates from the pancreas protects the
intestinal mucosa from acid as well as provide an alkaline medium (pH
7.8) for enzymatic activities. Sub-mucosal glands (Brunner’s glands) also
help in this.
    Proteins, proteoses and peptones (partially hydrolysed proteins) in
the chyme reaching the intestine are acted upon by the proteolytic
enzymes of pancreatic juice as given below:

              Proteins 
                         Trypsin/Chymotrypsin
              Peptones            → Dipeptides
                            Carboxypeptidase
                       
              Proteoses

    Carbohydrates in the chyme are hydrolysed by pancreatic amylase
into disaccharides.

                                         Amylase
              Polysaccharides ( starch ) 
                                              → Disaccharides

  Fats are broken down by lipases with the help of bile into di-and
monoglycerides.

                     Lipases
              Fats → Diglycerides → Monoglycerides


   Nucleases in the pancreatic juice acts on nucleic acids to form
nucleotides and nucleosides

                         Nucleases → Nucleotides → Nucleosides
          Nucleic acids 


    The enzymes in the succus entericus act on the end products of the
above reactions to form the respective simple absorbable forms. These
final steps in digestion occur very close to the mucosal epithelial cells of
the intestine.
264                                                                           BIOLOGY



                                         Dipeptidases
                            Dipeptides → Amino acids

                                  Maltase
                         Maltose     → Glucose + Glucose

                                    Lactase
                           Lactose     → Glucose + Galactose
                                  Sucrase
                         Sucrose     → Glucose + Fructose

                   Nucleotidases                Nucleosidases
      Nucleotides        → Nucleosides        → Sugars + Bases
                                        Lipases
                 Di and Monoglycerides → Fatty acids + Glycerol

           The breakdown of biomacromolecules mentioned above occurs in the
      duodenum region of the small intestine. The simple substances thus
      formed are absorbed in the jejunum and ileum regions of the small
      intestine. The undigested and unabsorbed substances are passed on to
      the large intestine.
           No significant digestive activity occurs in the large intestine. The
      functions of large intestine are:
             (i) absorption of some water, minerals and certain drugs;
            (ii) secretion of mucus which helps in adhering the waste (undigested)
                 particles together and lubricating it for an easy passage.
           The undigested, unabsorbed substances called faeces enters into the
      caecum of the large intestine through ileo-caecal valve, which prevents
      the back flow of the faecal matter. It is temporarily stored in the rectum
      till defaecation.
           The activities of the gastro-intestinal tract are under neural and
      hormonal control for proper coordination of different parts. The sight,
      smell and/or the presence of food in the oral cavity can stimulate the
      secretion of saliva. Gastric and intestinal secretions are also, similarly,
      stimulated by neural signals. The muscular activities of different parts of
      the alimentary canal can also be moderated by neural mechanisms, both
      local and through CNS. Hormonal control of the secretion of digestive
      juices is carried out by local hormones produced by the gastric and
      intestinal mucosa.


      16.3 ABSORPTION OF DIGESTED PRODUCTS
      Absorption is the process by which the end products of digestion pass
      through the intestinal mucosa into the blood or lymph. It is carried out by
      passive, active or facilitated transport mechanisms. Small amounts of
      monosaccharides like glucose, amino acids and some electrolytes like
      chloride ions are generally absorbed by simple diffusion. The passage of
      these substances into the blood depends upon the concentration gradients.
      However, some substances like glucose and amino acids are absorbed with
      the help of carrier proteins. This mechanism is called the facilitated transport.
     DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION                                                                   265


    Transport of water depends upon the osmotic gradient. Active
transport occurs against the concentration gradient and hence requires
energy. Various nutrients like amino acids, monosaccharides like glucose,
electrolytes like Na+ are absorbed into the blood by this mechanism.
    Fatty acids and glycerol being insoluble, cannot be absorbed into the
blood. They are first incorporated into small droplets called micelles which
move into the intestinal mucosa. They are re-formed into very small protein
coated fat globules called the chylomicrons which are transported into
the lymph vessels (lacteals) in the villi. These lymph vessels ultimately
release the absorbed substances into the blood stream.
    Absorption of substances takes place in different parts of the alimentary
canal, like mouth, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. However,
maximum absorption occurs in the small intestine. A summary of
absorption (sites of absorption and substances absorbed) is given in
Table 16.1.


       TABLE 16.1 The Summary of Absorption in Different Parts of Digestive System

 Mouth                  Stomach           Small Intestine                       Large Intestine

 Certain drugs          Absorption of     Principal organ for absorption        Absorption of
 coming in contact      water, simple     of nutrients. The digestion is        water, some
 with the mucosa        sugars, and       completed here and the final          minerals and
 of mouth and           alcohol etc.      products of digestion such as         drugs takes
 lower side of the      takes place.      glucose, fructose, fatty acids,       place.
 tongue are                               glycerol and amino acids are
 absorbed into the                        absorbed through the mucosa
 blood capillaries                        into the blood stream and
 lining them.                             lymph.


    The absorbed substances finally reach the tissues which utilise them
for their activities. This process is called assimilation.
    The digestive wastes, solidified into coherent faeces in the rectum
initiate a neural reflex causing an urge or desire for its removal. The
egestion of faeces to the outside through the anal opening (defaecation) is
a voluntary process and is carried out by a mass peristaltic movement.

16.4 DISORDERS OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
The inflammation of the intestinal tract is the most common ailment due
to bacterial or viral infections. The infections are also caused by the
parasites of the intestine like tapeworm, roundworm, threadworm,
hookworm, pin worm, etc.
Jaundice: The liver is affected, skin and eyes turn yellow due to the
deposit of bile pigments.
266                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                      Vomiting: It is the ejection of stomach contents through the mouth.
                      This reflex action is controlled by the vomit centre in the medulla. A feeling
                      of nausea precedes vomiting.
                      Diarrhoea: The abnormal frequency of bowel movement and increased
                      liquidity of the faecal discharge is known as diarrhoea. It reduces the
                      absorption of food.
                      Constipation: In constipation, the faeces are retained within the rectum
                      as the bowel movements occur irregularly.
                      Indigestion: In this condition, the food is not properly digested leading to
                      a feeling of fullness. The causes of indigestion are inadequate enzyme
                      secretion, anxiety, food poisoning, over eating, and spicy food.




                                           SUMMARY

      The digestive system of humans consists of an alimentary canal and associated
      digestive glands. The alimentary canal consists of the mouth, buccal cavity,
      pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum and the
      anus. The accessory digestive glands include the salivary glands, the liver (with
      gall bladder) and the pancreas. Inside the mouth the teeth masticates the food,
      the tongue tastes the food and manipulates it for proper mastication by mixing
      with the saliva. Saliva contains a starch digestive enzyme, salivary amylase that
      digests the starch and converts it into maltose (disaccharide). The food then passes
      into the pharynx and enters the oesophagus in the form of bolus, which is further
      carried down through the oesophagus by peristalsis into the stomach. In stomach
      mainly protein digestion takes place. Absorption of simple sugars, alcohol and
      medicines also takes place in the stomach.
             The chyme (food) enters into the duodenum portion of the small intestine
      and is acted on by the pancreatic juice, bile and finally by the enzymes in the
      succus entericus, so that the digestion of carbohydrates, proteins and fats is
      completed. The food then enters into the jejunum and ileum portions of the small
      intestine. Carbohydrates are digested and converted into monosaccharides like
      glucose. Proteins are finally broken down into amino acids. The fats are converted
      to fatty acids and glycerol. The digested end products are absorbed into the body
      through the epithelial lining of the intestinal villi. The undigested food (faeces)
      enters into the caecum of the large intestine through ileo-caecal valve, which
      prevents the back flow of the faecal matter. Most of the water is absorbed in the
      large intestine. The undigested food becomes semi-solid in nature and then enters
      into the rectum, anal canal and is finally egested out through the anus.
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION                                                                   267


                                       EXERCISES

  1.   Choose the correct answer among the following :
       (a) Gastric juice contains
             (i) pepsin, lipase and rennin
            (ii) trypsin, lipase and rennin
           (iii) trypsin, pepsin and lipase
           (iv) trypsin, pepsin and renin
       (b) Succus entericus is the name given to
             (i) a junction between ileum and large intestine
            (ii) intestinal juice
           (iii) swelling in the gut
           (iv) appendix
  2.   Match column I with column II
       Column I                            Column II
       (a) Bilirubin and biliverdin         (i) Parotid
       (b) Hydrolysis of starch            (ii) Bile
       (c) Digestion of fat               (iii) Lipases
       (d) Salivary gland                 (iv) Amylases
  3.   Answer briefly:
       (a) Why are villi present in the intestine and not in the stomach?
       (b) How does pepsinogen change into its active form?
       (c) What are the basic layers of the wall of alimentary canal?
       (d) How does bile help in the digestion of fats?
  4.   State the role of pancreatic juice in digestion of proteins.
  5.   Describe the process of digestion of protein in stomach.
  6.   Give the dental formula of human beings.
  7.   Bile juice contains no digestive enzymes, yet it is important for digestion. Why?
  8.   Describe the digestive role of chymotrypsin. Which two other digestive enzymes
       of the same category are secreted by its source gland?
  9.   How are polysaccharides and disaccharides digested?
 10.   What would happen if HCl were not secreted in the stomach?
 11.   How does butter in your food get digested and absorbed in the body?
 12.   Discuss the main steps in the digestion of proteins as the food passes through
       different parts of the alimentary canal.
 13.   Explain the term thecodont and diphyodont.
 14.   Name different types of teeth and their number in an adult human.
 15.   What are the functions of liver?
    NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                                            315




                           CHAPTER 21
                           NEURAL CONTROL                          AND

                           COORDINATION
21.1 Neural System     As you know, the functions of the organs/organ systems in our body
                       must be coordinated to maintain homeostasis. Coordination is the
21.2 Human Neural
                       process through which two or more organs interact and complement the
     System
                       functions of one another. For example, when we do physical exercises,
21.3 Neuron as         the energy demand is increased for maintaining an increased muscular
     Structural and    activity. The supply of oxygen is also increased. The increased supply of
     Functional Unit   oxygen necessitates an increase in the rate of respiration, heart beat and
     of Neural         increased blood flow via blood vessels. When physical exercise is stopped,
     System            the activities of nerves, lungs, heart and kidney gradually return to their
21.4 Central Neural    normal conditions. Thus, the functions of muscles, lungs, heart, blood
     System            vessels, kidney and other organs are coordinated while performing physical
                       exercises. In our body the neural system and the endocrine system jointly
21.5 Reflex Action
                       coordinate and integrate all the activities of the organs so that they function
     and Reflex Arc
                       in a synchronised fashion.
21.6 Sensory               The neural system provides an organised network of point-to-point
     Reception and     connections for a quick coordination. The endocrine system provides
     Processing        chemical integration through hormones. In this chapter, you will learn
                       about the neural system of human, mechanisms of neural coordination
                       like transmission of nerve impulse, impulse conduction across a synapse
                       and the physiology of reflex action.
316                                                                        BIOLOGY


      21.1 NEURAL SYSTEM

      The neural system of all animals is composed of highly specialised cells
      called neurons which can detect, receive and transmit different kinds of
      stimuli.
          The neural organisation is very simple in lower invertebrates. For
      example, in Hydra it is composed of a network of neurons. The neural
      system is better organised in insects, where a brain is present along with
      a number of ganglia and neural tissues. The vertebrates have a more
      developed neural system.


      21.2 HUMAN NEURAL SYSTEM

      The human neural system is divided into two parts :
         (i) the central neural system (CNS)
         (ii) the peripheral neural system (PNS)
          The CNS includes the brain and the spinal cord and is the site of
      information processing and control. The PNS comprises of all the nerves
      of the body associated with the CNS (brain and spinal cord). The nerve
      fibres of the PNS are of two types :
          (a) afferent fibres
          (b) efferent fibres
          The afferent nerve fibres transmit impulses from tissues/organs to
      the CNS and the efferent fibres transmit regulatory impulses from the
      CNS to the concerned peripheral tissues/organs.
          The PNS is divided into two divisions called somatic neural system
      and autonomic neural system. The somatic neural system relays
      impulses from the CNS to skeletal muscles while the autonomic neural
      system transmits impulses from the CNS to the involuntary organs and
      smooth muscles of the body. The autonomic neural system is further
      classified into sympathetic neural system and parasympathetic neural
      system.


      21.3 NEURON AS STRUCTURAL            AND   FUNCTIONAL UNIT      OF
           NEURAL SYSTEM

      A neuron is a microscopic structure composed of three major parts,
      namely, cell body, dendrites and axon (Figure 21.1). The cell body
      contains cytoplasm with typical cell organelles and certain granular bodies
      called Nissl’s granules. Short fibres which branch repeatedly and project
      out of the cell body also contain Nissl’s granules and are called dendrites.
      These fibres transmit impulses towards the cell body. The axon is a long
    NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                                      317


fibre, the distal end of which is branched. Each
branch terminates as a bulb-like structure called
synaptic knob which possess synaptic vesicles
containing chemicals called neurotransmitters.
The axons transmit nerve impulses away from the
cell body to a synapse or to a neuro-muscular
junction. Based on the number of axon and
dendrites, the neurons are divided into three types,
i.e., multipolar (with one axon and two or more
dendrites; found in the cerebral cortex), bipolar
(with one axon and one dendrite, found in the retina
of eye) and unipolar (cell body with one axon only;
found usually in the embryonic stage). There are
two types of axons, namely, myelinated and non-
myelinated. The myelinated nerve fibres are
enveloped with Schwann cells, which form a myelin
sheath around the axon. The gaps between two
adjacent myelin sheaths are called nodes of
Ranvier. Myelinated nerve fibres are found in spinal
and cranial nerves. Unmyelinated nerve fibre is
enclosed by a Schwann cell that does not form a
myelin sheath around the axon, and is commonly
found in autonomous and the somatic neural
systems.

21.3.1 Generation and Conduction of
                                                           Figure 21.1 Structure of a neuron
       Nerve Impulse
Neurons are excitable cells because their membranes are in a polarised
state. Do you know why the membrane of a neuron is polarised? Different
types of ion channels are present on the neural membrane. These ion
channels are selectively permeable to different ions. When a neuron is not
conducting any impulse, i.e., resting, the axonal membrane is
                                                           +
comparatively more permeable to potassium ions (K ) and nearly
impermeable to sodium ions (Na + ). Similarly, the membrane is
impermeable to negatively charged proteins present in the axoplasm.
Consequently, the axoplasm inside the axon contains high concentration
of K + and negatively charged proteins and low concentration of Na+. In
contrast, the fluid outside the axon contains a low concentration of K +, a
high concentration of Na+ and thus form a concentration gradient. These
ionic gradients across the resting membrane are maintained by the active
transport of ions by the sodium-potassium pump which transports 3
   +                  +
Na outwards for 2 K into the cell. As a result, the outer surface of the
axonal membrane possesses a positive charge while its inner surface
318                                                                                          BIOLOGY



             A
             Na
        -    +         +   +       +   +   +     +       +   +     +
                  -
                       -   -       -   -   -     -       -         -
         +        +                                          -
        +         +    -   -       -   -   -         -       -     -
        -         -    +               +   +         +   +   +     +
                           +       +
             +
             Na


                               B
        -    +         +   +       +   +   +     +       +   +     +
                  -
                       -   -       -   -   -     -       -         -
         +        +                                          -
        +         +    -   -       -   -   -         -       -     -
        -         -    +               +   +         +   +   +     +
                           +       +
             +

Figure 21.2 Diagrammatic representation of impulse conduction through an axon
            (at points A and B)

                      becomes negatively charged and therefore is polarised. The electrical
                      potential difference across the resting plasma membrane is called as the
                      resting potential.
                           You might be curious to know about the mechanisms of generation
                      of nerve impulse and its conduction along an axon. When a stimulus is
                      applied at a site (Figure 21.2 e.g., point A) on the polarised membrane,
                      the membrane at the site A becomes freely permeable to Na+. This leads
                      to a rapid influx of Na+ followed by the reversal of the polarity at that site,
                      i.e., the outer surface of the membrane becomes negatively charged and
                      the inner side becomes positively charged. The polarity of the membrane
                      at the site A is thus reversed and hence depolarised. The electrical potential
                      difference across the plasma membrane at the site A is called the
                      action potential, which is in fact termed as a nerve impulse. At sites
                      immediately ahead, the axon (e.g., site B) membrane has a positive charge
                      on the outer surface and a negative charge on its inner surface. As a
                      result, a current flows on the inner surface from site A to site B. On the
                      outer surface current flows from site B to site A (Figure 21.2) to complete
                      the circuit of current flow. Hence, the polarity at the site is reversed, and
                      an action potential is generated at site B. Thus, the impulse (action
                      potential) generated at site A arrives at site B. The sequence is repeated
                      along the length of the axon and consequently the impulse is conducted.
                      The rise in the stimulus-induced permeability to Na+ is extremely short-
                      lived. It is quickly followed by a rise in permeability to K+. Within a fraction
                      of a second, K+ diffuses outside the membrane and restores the resting
                      potential of the membrane at the site of excitation and the fibre becomes
                      once more responsive to further stimulation.
    NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                          319


21.3.2 Transmission of Impulses
A nerve impulse is transmitted from one neuron to another through
junctions called synapses. A synapse is formed by the membranes of a
pre-synaptic neuron and a post-synaptic neuron, which may or may not
be separated by a gap called synaptic cleft. There are two types of
synapses, namely, electrical synapses and chemical synapses. At electrical
synapses, the membranes of pre- and post-synaptic neurons are in very
close proximity. Electrical current can flow directly from one neuron into
the other across these synapses. Transmission of an impulse across
electrical synapses is very similar to impulse conduction along a single
axon. Impulse transmission across an electrical synapse is always faster
than that across a chemical synapse. Electrical synapses are rare in our
system.
    At a chemical synapse, the membranes of the pre- and post-synaptic
neurons are separated by a fluid-filled space called synaptic cleft
(Figure 21.3). Do you know how the pre-synaptic neuron transmits an
impulse (action potential) across the synaptic cleft to the post-synaptic
neuron? Chemicals called neurotransmitters are involved in the
transmission of impulses at these synapses. The axon terminals contain
vesicles filled with these neurotransmitters. When an impulse (action
potential) arrives at the axon terminal, it stimulates the movement of the
synaptic vesicles towards the membrane where they fuse with the plasma




                   Figure 21.3 Diagram showing axon terminal and synapse
320                                                                                             BIOLOGY


                              membrane and release their neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft. The
                              released neurotransmitters bind to their specific receptors, present on
                              the post-synaptic membrane. This binding opens ion channels allowing
                              the entry of ions which can generate a new potential in the post-synaptic
                              neuron. The new potential developed may be either excitatory or
                              inhibitory.


                              21.4 CENTRAL NEURAL SYSTEM

                              The brain is the central information processing organ of our body, and
                              acts as the ‘command and control system’. It controls the voluntary
                              movements, balance of the body, functioning of vital involuntary organs
                              (e.g., lungs, heart, kidneys, etc.), thermoregulation, hunger and thirst,
                              circadian (24-hour) rhythms of our body, activities of several endocrine
                              glands and human behaviour. It is also the site for processing of vision,
                              hearing, speech, memory, intelligence, emotions and thoughts.
                                    The human brain is well protected by the skull. Inside the skull, the
                              brain is covered by cranial meninges consisting of an outer layer called
                              dura mater, a very thin middle layer called arachnoid and an inner layer
                              (which is in contact with the brain tissue) called pia mater. The brain can
                              be divided into three major parts: (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain, and
                              (iii) hindbrain (Figure 21.4).
      Forebrain




                  Figure 21.4 Diagram showing sagital section of the human brain
     NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                            321


21.4.1 Forebrain
The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and hypothalamus (Figure
21.4). Cerebrum forms the major part of the human brain. A deep cleft
divides the cerebrum longitudinally into two halves, which are termed as
the left and right cerebral hemispheres. The hemispheres are connected
by a tract of nerve fibres called corpus callosum. The layer of cells which
covers the cerebral hemisphere is called cerebral cortex and is thrown
into prominent folds. The cerebral cortex is referred to as the grey matter
due to its greyish appearance. The neuron cell bodies are concentrated
here giving the colour. The cerebral cortex contains motor areas, sensory
areas and large regions that are neither clearly sensory nor motor in
function. These regions called as the association areas are responsible
for complex functions like intersensory associations, memory and
communication. Fibres of the tracts are covered with the myelin sheath,
which constitute the inner part of cerebral hemisphere. They give an
opaque white appearance to the layer and, hence, is called the white matter.
The cerebrum wraps around a structure called thalamus, which is a major
coordinating centre for sensory and motor signaling. Another very
important part of the brain called hypothalamus lies at the base of the
thalamus. The hypothalamus contains a number of centres which control
body temperature, urge for eating and drinking. It also contains several
groups of neurosecretory cells, which secrete hormones called
hypothalamic hormones. The inner parts of cerebral hemispheres and a
group of associated deep structures like amygdala, hippocampus, etc.,
form a complex structure called the limbic lobe or limbic system. Along
with the hypothalamus, it is involved in the regulation of sexual behaviour,
expression of emotional reactions (e.g., excitement, pleasure, rage and
fear), and motivation.

21.4.2 Midbrain
The midbrain is located between the thalamus/hypothalamus of the
forebrain and pons of the hindbrain. A canal called the cerebral aqueduct
passess through the midbrain. The dorsal portion of the midbrain consists
mainly of four round swellings (lobes) called corpora quadrigemina.
Midbrain and hindbrain form the brain stem.

21.4.3 Hindbrain
The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla (also called the
medulla oblongata). Pons consists of fibre tracts that interconnect different
regions of the brain. Cerebellum has very convoluted surface in order to
provide the additional space for many more neurons. The medulla of the
brain is connected to the spinal cord. The medulla contains centres which
control respiration, cardiovascular reflexes and gastric secretions.
322                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                     21.5 REFLEX ACTION         AND   REFLEX ARC

                     You must have experienced a sudden withdrawal of a body part which
                     comes in contact with objects that are extremely hot, cold pointed or
                     animals that are scary or poisonous. The entire process of response to a
                     peripheral nervous stimulation, that occurs involuntarily, i.e., without
                     conscious effort or thought and requires the involvment of a part of the
                     central nervous system is called a reflex action. The reflex pathway
                     comprises at least one afferent neuron (receptor) and one efferent (effector
                     or excitor) neuron appropriately arranged in a series (Figure 21.5). The
                     afferent neuron receives signal from a sensory organ and transmits the
                     impulse via a dorsal nerve root into the CNS (at the level of spinal cord).
                     The efferent nueuron then carries signals from CNS to the effector. The
                     stimulus and response thus forms a reflex arc as shown below in the
                     knee jerk reflex. You should carefully study Figure 21.5 to understand
                     the mechanism of a knee jerk reflex.




      Figure 21.5 Diagrammatic presentation of reflex action (showing knee jerk reflex)


                     21.6 SENSORY RECEPTION AND PROCESSING

                     Have you ever thought how do you feel the climatic changes in the
                     environment? How do you see an object and its colour? How do you
                     hear a sound? The sensory organs detect all types of changes in the
                     environment and send appropriate signals to the CNS, where all the inputs
                     are processed and analysed. Signals are then sent to different parts/
                     centres of the brain. This is how you can sense changes in the environment.
     NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                                323


In the following sections, you will be introduced to the structure and
functioning of the eye (sensory organ for vision) and the ear (sensory organ
for hearing).

21.6.1 Eye
Our paired eyes are located in sockets of the skull called orbits. A brief
account of structure and functions of the human eye is given in the
following sections.

21.6.1.1 Parts of an eye
The adult human eye ball is nearly a spherical structure. The wall of the
eye ball is composed of three layers (Figure 21.6). The external layer is
composed of a dense connective tissue and is called the sclera. The anterior
portion of this layer is called the cornea. The middle layer, choroid,
contains many blood vessels and looks bluish in colour. The choroid layer
is thin over the posterior two-thirds of the eye ball, but it becomes thick
in the anterior part to form the ciliary body. The ciliary body itself
continues forward to form a pigmented and opaque structure called the
iris which is the visible coloured portion of the eye. The eye ball contains
a transparent crystalline lens which is held in place by ligaments attached
to the ciliary body. In front of the lens, the aperture surrounded by the
iris is called the pupil. The diameter of the pupil is regulated by the muscle
fibres of iris.
     The inner layer is the retina and it contains three layers of neural cells –
from inside to outside – ganglion cells, bipolar cells and photoreceptor cells.




                                      Figure 21.6 Diagram showing parts of an eye
324                                                                      BIOLOGY


      There are two types of photoreceptor cells, namely, rods and cones. These
      cells contain the light-sensitive proteins called the photopigments. The
      daylight (photopic) vision and colour vision are functions of cones and
      the twilight (scotopic) vision is the function of the rods. The rods contain
      a purplish-red protein called the rhodopsin or visual purple, which
      contains a derivative of Vitamin A. In the human eye, there are three types
      of cones which possess their own characteristic photopigments that
      respond to red, green and blue lights. The sensations of different colours
      are produced by various combinations of these cones and their
      photopigments. When these cones are stimulated equally, a sensation of
      white light is produced.
          The optic nerves leave the eye and the retinal blood vessels enter it at
      a point medial to and slightly above the posterior pole of the eye ball.
      Photoreceptor cells are not present in that region and hence it is called
      the blind spot. At the posterior pole of the eye lateral to the blind spot,
      there is a yellowish pigmented spot called macula lutea with a central pit
      called the fovea. The fovea is a thinned-out portion of the retina where
      only the cones are densely packed. It is the point where the visual acuity
      (resolution) is the greatest.
          The space between the cornea and the lens is called the aqueous
      chamber and contains a thin watery fluid called aqueous humor. The
      space between the lens and the retina is called the vitreous chamber
      and is filled with a transparent gel called vitreous humor.

      21.6.1.2 Mechanism of Vision
      The light rays in visible wavelength focussed on the retina through the
      cornea and lens generate potentials (impulses) in rods and cones. As
      mentioned earlier, the photosensitive compounds (photopigments) in the
      human eyes is composed of opsin (a protein) and retinal (an aldehyde of
      vitamin A). Light induces dissociation of the retinal from opsin resulting
      in changes in the structure of the opsin. This causes membrane
      permeability changes. As a result, potential differences are generated in
      the photoreceptor cells. This produces a signal that generates action
      potentials in the ganglion cells through the bipolar cells. These action
      potentials (impulses) are transmitted by the optic nerves to the visual
      cortex area of the brain, where the neural impulses are analysed and the
      image formed on the retina is recognised based on earlier memory and
      experience.

      21.6.2 The Ear
      The ears perform two sensory functions, hearing and maintenance of body
      balance. Anatomically, the ear can be divided into three major sections
      called the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear (Figure 21.7). The
     NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                           325




                                       Figure 21.7 Diagrammatic view of ear


outer ear consists of the pinna and external auditory meatus (canal).
The pinna collects the vibrations in the air which produce sound. The
external auditory meatus leads inwards and extends up to the tympanic
membrane (the ear drum). There are very fine hairs and wax-secreting
glands in the skin of the pinna and the meatus. The tympanic membrane
is composed of connective tissues covered with skin outside and with
mucus membrane inside. The middle ear contains three ossicles called
malleus, incus and stapes which are attached to one another in a chain-
like fashion. The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane and the
stapes is attached to the oval window of the cochlea. The ear ossicles
increase the efficiency of transmission of sound waves to the inner ear. An
Eustachian tube connects the middle ear cavity with the pharynx. The
Eustachian tube helps in equalising the pressures on either sides of the
ear drum.
     The fluid-filled inner ear called labyrinth consists of two parts, the
bony and the membranous labyrinths. The bony labyrinth is a series of
channels. Inside these channels lies the membranous labyrinth, which is
surrounded by a fluid called perilymph. The membranous labyrinth is
filled with a fluid called endolymph. The coiled portion of the labyrinth is
called cochlea. The membranes constituting cochlea, the reissner’s and
basilar, divide the surounding perilymph filled bony labyrinth into an
upper scala vestibuli and a lower scala tympani (Figure 21.8). The space
within cochlea called scala media is filled with endolymph. At the base of
the cochlea, the scala vestibuli ends at the oval window, while the scala
tympani terminates at the round window which opens to the middle ear.
326                                                                                     BIOLOGY




      Figure 21.8 Diagrammatic representation of the sectional view of cochlea


                     The organ of corti is a structure located on the basilar membrane
                 which contains hair cells that act as auditory receptors. The hair cells
                 are present in rows on the internal side of the organ of corti. The basal
                 end of the hair cell is in close contact with the afferent nerve fibres. A large
                 number of processes called stereo cilia are projected from the apical part
                 of each hair cell. Above the rows of the hair cells is a thin elastic membrane
                 called tectorial membrane.
                     The inner ear also contains a complex system called vestibular
                 apparatus, located above the cochlea. The vestibular apparatus is
                 composed of three semi-circular canals and the otolith (macula is the
                 sensory part of saccule and utricle). Each semi-circular canal lies in a
                 different plane at right angles to each other. The membranous canals are
                 suspended in the perilymph of the bony canals. The base of canals is
                 swollen and is called ampulla, which contains a projecting ridge called
                 crista ampullaris which has hair cells. The saccule and utricle contain a
                 projecting ridge called macula. The crista and macula are the specific
                 receptors of the vestibular apparatus responsible for maintenance of
                 balance of the body and posture.
     NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                                          327


20.6.2.1       Mechanism of Hearing
How does ear convert sound waves into neural impulses, which are
sensed and processed by the brain enabling us to recognise a sound ?
The external ear receives sound waves and directs them to the ear drum.
The ear drum vibrates in response to the sound waves and these vibrations
are transmitted through the ear ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) to
the oval window. The vibrations are passed through the oval window on
to the fluid of the cochlea, where they generate waves in the lymphs. The
waves in the lymphs induce a ripple in the basilar membrane. These
movements of the basilar membrane bend the hair cells, pressing them
against the tectorial membrane. As a result, nerve impulses are generated
in the associated afferent neurons. These impulses are transmitted by
the afferent fibres via auditory nerves to the auditory cortex of the brain,
where the impulses are analysed and the sound is recognised.



                                            SUMMARY

       The neural system coordinates and integrates functions as well as metabolic
       and homeostatic activities of all the organs. Neurons, the functional units of
       neural system are excitable cells due to a differential concentration gradient of
       ions across the membrane. The electrical potential difference across the resting
       neural membrane is called the ‘resting potential’. The nerve impulse is conducted
       along the axon membrane in the form of a wave of depolarisation and
       repolarisation. A synapse is formed by the membranes of a pre-synaptic neuron
       and a post-synaptic neuron which may or may not be separated by a gap called
       synaptic cleft. Chemicals involved in the transmission of impulses at chemical
       synapses are called neurotransmitters.
           Human neural system consists of two parts : (i) central neural system (CNS)
       and (ii) the peripheral neural system. The CNS consists of the brain and spiral
       cord. The brain can be divided into three major parts : (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain
       and (iii) hindbrain. The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and
       hypothalamus. The cerebrum is longitudinally divided into two halves that are
       connected by the corpus callosum. A very important part of the forebrain called
       hypothalamus controls the body temperature, eating and drinking. Inner parts
       of cerebral hemispheres and a group of associated deep structures form a complex
       structure called limbic system which is concerned with olfaction, autonomic
       responses, regulation of sexual behaviour, expression of emotional reactions,
       and motivation. The midbrain receives and integrates visual, tactile and auditory
       inputs. The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla. The cerebellum
       integrates information received from the semicircular canals of the ear and the
328                                                                                       BIOLOGY


      auditory system. The medulla contains centres, which control respiration,
      cardiovascular reflexes, and gastric secretions. Pons consist of fibre tracts that
      interconnect different regions of the brain. The entire process of involuntary
      response to a peripheral nervous stimulation is called reflex action.
           Information regarding changes in the environment is received by the CNS
      through the sensory organs which are processed and analysed. Signals are then
      sent for necessary adjustments. The wall of the human eye ball is composed of
      three layers. The external layer is composed of cornea and sclera. Inside sclera is
      the middle layer, which is called the choroid. Retina, the innermost layer, contains
      two types of photoreceptor cells, namely rods and cones. The daylight (photopic)
      vision and colour vision are functions of cones and twilight (scotopic) vision is the
      function of the rods. The light enters through cornea, the lens and the images of
      objects are formed on the retina.
           The ear can be divided into the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear. The
      middle ear contains three ossicles called malleus, incus and stapes. The fluid
      filled inner ear is called the labyrinth, and the coiled portion of the labyrinth is
      called cochlea. The organ of corti is a structure which contains hair cells that act
      as auditory receptors and is located on the basilar membrane. The vibrations
      produced in the ear drum are transmitted through the ear ossicles and oval window
      to the fluid-filled inner ear. Nerve impulses are generated and transmitted by the
      afferent fibres to the auditory cortex of the brain. The inner ear also contains a
      complex system located above the cochlea called vestibular apparatus. It is
      influenced by gravity and movements, and helps us in maintaining balance of the
      body and posture.



                                            EXERCISES

      1. Briefly describe the structure of the following:
         (a) Brain     (b) Eye    (c) Ear
      2. Compare the following:
         (a) Central neural system (CNS) and Peripheral neural system (PNS)
         (b) Resting potential and action potential
         (c) Choroid and retina
      3. Explain the following processes:
         (a) Polarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
         (b) Depolarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
         (c) Conduction of a nerve impulse along a nerve fibre
         (d) Transmission of a nerve impulse across a chemical synapse
      4. Draw labelled diagrams of the following:
         (a) Neuron     (b) Brain    (c) Eye    (d) Ear
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION                                                          329


  5. Write short notes on the following:
     (a) Neural coordination (b) Forebrain      (c) Midbrain
     (d) Hindbrain      (e) Retina (f) Ear ossicles
     (g) Cochlea (h) Organ of Corti(i) Synapse
  6. Give a brief account of:
     (a) Mechanism of synaptic transmission
     (b) Mechanism of vision
     (c) Mechanism of hearing
  7. Answer briefly:
     (a) How do you perceive the colour of an object?
     (b) Which part of our body helps us in maintaining the body balance?
     (c) How does the eye regulate the amount of light that falls on the retina.
  8. Explain the following:
     (a) Role of Na+ in the generation of action potential.
     (b) Mechanism of generation of light-induced impulse in the retina.
     (c) Mechanism through which a sound produces a nerve impulse in the
         inner ear.
  9. Differentiate between:
     (a) Myelinated and non-myelinated axons
     (b) Dendrites and axons
     (c) Rods and cones
     (d) Thalamus and Hypothalamus
     (e) Cerebrum and Cerebellum
 10. Answer the following:
     (a) Which part of the ear determines the pitch of a sound?
     (b) Which part of the human brain is the most developed?
     (c) Which part of our central neural system acts as a master clock?
 11. The region of the vertebrate eye, where the optic nerve passes out of the retina,
     is called the
     (a) fovea
     (b) iris
     (c) blind spot
     (d) optic chaisma
 12. Distinguish between:
     (a) afferent neurons and efferent neurons
     (b) impulse conduction in a myelinated nerve fibre and unmyelinated nerve fibre
     (c) aqueous humor and vitreous humor
     (d) blind spot and yellow spot
     (f) cranial nerves and spinal nerves.
CHAPTER 6

MOLECULAR BASIS OF
INHERITANCE

6.1   The DNA

6.2   The Search for Genetic
      Material                 In the previous chapter, you have learnt the inheritance
                               patterns and the genetic basis of such patterns. At the
6.3   RNA World                time of Mendel, the nature of those ‘factors’ regulating
6.4   Replication              the pattern of inheritance was not clear. Over the next
                               hundred years, the nature of the putative genetic material
6.5   Transcription
                               was investigated culminating in the realisation that
6.6   Genetic Code             DNA – deoxyribonucleic acid – is the genetic material, at
                               least for the majority of organisms. In class XI you have
6.7   Translation
                               learnt that nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides.
6.8   Regulation of Gene            Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid
      Expression               (RNA) are the two types of nucleic acids found in living
6.9   Human Genome Project     systems. DNA acts as the genetic material in most of the
                               organisms. RNA though it also acts as a genetic material
6.10 DNA Fingerprinting        in some viruses, mostly functions as a messenger. RNA
                               has additional roles as well. It functions as adapter,
                               structural, and in some cases as a catalytic molecule. In
                               Class XI you have already learnt the structures of
                               nucleotides and the way these monomer units are linked
                               to form nucleic acid polymers. In this chapter we are going
                               to discuss the structure of DNA, its replication, the process
                               of making RNA from DNA (transcription), the genetic code
                               that determines the sequences of amino acids in proteins,
                               the process of protein synthesis (translation) and
                               elementary basis of their regulation. The determination




                                                                                        2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY

     of complete nucleotide sequence of human genome during last decade
     has set in a new era of genomics. In the last section, the essentials of
     human genome sequencing and its consequences will also be discussed.
         Let us begin our discussion by first understanding the structure of
     the most interesting molecule in the living system, that is, the DNA. In
     subsequent sections, we will understand that why it is the most abundant
     genetic material, and what its relationship is with RNA.

     6.1 THE DNA
     DNA is a long polymer of deoxyribonucleotides. The length of DNA is
     usually defined as number of nucleotides (or a pair of nucleotide referred
     to as base pairs) present in it. This also is the characteristic of an organism.
     For example, a bacteriophage known as φ ×174 has 5386 nucleotides,
     Bacteriophage lambda has 48502 base pairs (bp), Escherichia coli has
     4.6 × 106 bp, and haploid content of human DNA is 3.3 × 109 bp. Let us
     discuss the structure of such a long polymer.

     6.1.1 Structure of Polynucleotide Chain
     Let us recapitulate the chemical structure of a polynucleotide chain (DNA
     or RNA). A nucleotide has three components – a nitrogenous base, a
     pentose sugar (ribose in case of RNA, and deoxyribose for DNA), and a
     phosphate group. There are two types of nitrogenous bases – Purines
     (Adenine and Guanine), and Pyrimidines (Cytosine, Uracil and Thymine).
     Cytosine is common for both DNA and RNA and Thymine is present in
     DNA. Uracil is present in RNA at the place of Thymine. A nitrogenous
     base is linked to the pentose sugar through a N-glycosidic linkage to
     form a nucleoside, such as adenosine or deoxyadenosine, guanosine or
     deoxyguanosine, cytidine or deoxycytidine and uridine or deoxythymidine.
     When a phosphate group is linked to 5' -OH of a nucleoside through
     phosphoester linkage, a corresponding nucleotide (or deoxynucleotide
     depending upon the type of sugar present) is formed. Two nucleotides
     are linked through 3'-5' phosphodiester linkage to form a dinucleotide.
     More nucleotides can be joined in such a manner to form a polynucleotide
     chain. A polymer thus formed has at one end a free phosphate moiety at




96




                    Figure 6.1 A Polynucleotide chain




                                                                             2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

5' -end of ribose sugar, which is referred to as 5’-end of polynucleotide
chain. Similarly, at the other end of the polymer the ribose has a free
3' -OH group which is referred to as 3'- end of the polynucleotide chain.
The backbone in a polynucleotide chain is formed due to sugar and
phosphates. The nitrogenous bases linked to sugar moiety project from
the backbone (Figure 6.1).
     In RNA, every nucleotide residue has an additional –OH group present
at 2' -position in the ribose. Also, in RNA the uracil is found at the place of
thymine (5-methyl uracil, another chemical name for thymine).
     DNA as an acidic substance present in nucleus was first identified by
Friedrich Meischer in 1869. He named it as ‘Nuclein’. However, due to
technical limitation in isolating such a long polymer intact, the elucidation
of structure of DNA remained elusive for a very long period of time. It was
only in 1953 that James Watson and Francis Crick, based on the X-ray
diffraction data produced by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin,
proposed a very simple but famous Double Helix model for the structure
of DNA. One of the hallmarks of their proposition was base pairing between
the two strands of polynucleotide chains. However, this proposition was
also based on the observation of Erwin Chargaff that for a double stranded
DNA, the ratios between Adenine and Thymine and Guanine and Cytosine
are constant and equals one.
     The base pairing confers a very unique property to the polynucleotide
chains. They are said to be complementary to each other, and therefore if
the sequence of bases in one strand is known then the sequence in other
strand can be predicted. Also, if each strand from a DNA (let us call it as a
parental DNA) acts as a template for synthesis of a new strand, the two
double stranded DNA (let us call them as daughter DNA) thus, produced
would be identical to the parental DNA molecule. Because of this, the genetic
implications of the structure of DNA became very clear.
   The salient features of the Double-helix structure of DNA are as follows:
     (i) It is made of two polynucleotide chains, where the backbone is
         constituted by sugar-phosphate, and the bases project inside.
    (ii) The two chains have anti-parallel polarity. It means, if one
         chain has the polarity 5' à3' , the other has 3 ' à5 ' .
   (iii) The bases in two strands are paired through hydrogen bond
         (H-bonds) forming base pairs (bp). Adenine forms two hydrogen
         bonds with Thymine from opposite strand and vice-versa.
         Similarly, Guanine is bonded with Cytosine with three H-bonds.
         As a result, always a purine comes opposite to a pyrimidine. This        97
         generates approximately uniform distance between the two
         strands of the helix (Figure 6.2).
   (iv) The two chains are coiled in a right-handed fashion. The pitch
         of the helix is 3.4 nm (a nanometre is one billionth of a
         metre, that is 10-9 m) and there are roughly 10 bp in each




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                                BIOLOGY




                 Figure 6.2 Double stranded polynucleotide chain




                                                    turn. Consequently, the distance
                                                    between a bp in a h e l i x i s
                                                    approximately equal to 0.34 nm.
                                                (v) The plane of one base pair stacks
                                                    over the other in double helix. This,
                                                    in addition to H-bonds, confers
                                                    stability of the helical structure
                                                    (Figure 6.3).
                                                Compare the structure of purines and
                                           pyrimidines. Can you find out why the
                                           distance between two polynucleotide
                                           chains in DNA remains almost constant?
                                               The proposition of a double helix
                                           structure for DNA and its simplicity in
                                           explaining the genetic implication became
                                           revolutionary. Very soon, Francis Crick
                                           proposed the Central dogma in molecular
                                           biology, which states that the genetic
     Figure 6.3 DNA double helix           information flows from DNAàRNAàProtein.

98




                                                           Central dogma




                                                                                 2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

   In some viruses the flow of information is in reverse direction, that is,
from RNA to DNA. Can you suggest a simple name to the process?

6.1.2 Packaging of DNA Helix
Taken the distance between two consecutive base pairs
as 0.34 nm (0.34×10–9 m), if the length of DNA double
helix in a typical mammalian cell is calculated (simply
by multiplying the total number of bp with distance
between two consecutive bp, that is, 6.6 × 109 bp ×
0.34 × 10-9 m/bp), it comes out to be approximately
2.2 metres. A length that is far greater than the
dimension of a typical nucleus (approximately 10–6 m).
How is such a long polymer packaged in a cell?
    If the length of E. coli DNA is 1.36 mm, can you
calculate the number of base pairs in E.coli?
    In prokaryotes, such as, E. coli, though they do
not have a defined nucleus, the DNA is not scattered              Figure 6.4a Nucleosome
throughout the cell. DNA (being negatively charged)
is held with some proteins (that have positive
charges) in a region termed as ‘nucleoid’. The DNA
in nucleoid is organised in large loops held by
proteins.
    In eukaryotes, this organisation is much more
complex. There is a set of positively charged, basic
proteins called histones. A protein acquires charge
depending upon the abundance of amino acids
residues with charged side chains. Histones are rich
in the basic amino acid residues lysines and
arginines. Both the amino acid residues carry Figure 6.4b EM picture - ‘Beads-on-String’
positive charges in their side chains. Histones are
organised to form a unit of eight molecules called
as histone octamer. The negatively charged DNA is wrapped around
the positively charged histone octamer to form a structure called
nucleosome (Figure 6.4 a). A typical nucleosome contains 200 bp of
DNA helix. Nucleosomes constitute the repeating unit of a structure in
nucleus called chromatin, thread-like stained (coloured) bodies seen in
nucleus. The nucleosomes in chromatin are seen as ‘beads-on-string’
structure when viewed under electron microscope (EM) (Figure 6.4 b).
    Theoretically, how many such beads (nucleosomes) do you imagine
                                                                                         99
are present in a mammalian cell?
    The beads-on-string structure in chromatin is packaged to form
chromatin fibers that are further coiled and condensed at metaphase stage
of cell division to form chromosomes. The packaging of chromatin at higher
level requires additional set of proteins that collectively are referred to as




                                                                                       2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY

      Non-histone Chromosomal (NHC) proteins. In a typical nucleus, some
      region of chromatin are loosely packed (and stains light) and are referred to
      as euchromatin. The chromatin that is more densely packed and stains
      dark are called as Heterochromatin. Euchromatin is said to be
      transcriptionally active chromatin, whereas heterochromatin is inactive.

      6.2 THE SEARCH        FOR   GENETIC MATERIAL
      Even though the discovery of nuclein by Meischer and the proposition
      for principles of inheritance by Mendel were almost at the same time, but
      that the DNA acts as a genetic material took long to be discovered and
      proven. By 1926, the quest to determine the mechanism for genetic
      inheritance had reached the molecular level. Previous discoveries by
      Gregor Mendel, Walter Sutton, Thomas Hunt Morgan and numerous other
      scientists had narrowed the search to the chromosomes located in the
      nucleus of most cells. But the question of what molecule was actually the
      genetic material, had not been answered.

      Transforming Principle
      In 1928, Frederick Griffith, in a series of experiments with Streptococcus
      pneumoniae (bacterium responsible for pneumonia), witnessed a
      miraculous transformation in the bacteria. During the course of his
      experiment, a living organism (bacteria) had changed in physical form.
          When Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) bacteria are grown
      on a culture plate, some produce smooth shiny colonies (S) while others
      produce rough colonies (R). This is because the S strain bacteria have a
      mucous (polysaccharide) coat, while R strain does not. Mice infected with
      the S strain (virulent) die from pneumonia infection but mice infected
      with the R strain do not develop pneumonia.




         Griffith was able to kill bacteria by heating them. He observed that
      heat-killed S strain bacteria injected into mice did not kill them. When he



100




                                                                           2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE


injected a mixture of heat-killed S and live R bacteria, the mice died.
Moreover, he recovered living S bacteria from the dead mice.
    He concluded that the R strain bacteria had somehow been
transformed by the heat-killed S strain bacteria. Some ‘transforming
principle’, transferred from the heat-killed S strain, had enabled the
R strain to synthesise a smooth polysaccharide coat and become virulent.
This must be due to the transfer of the genetic material. However, the
biochemical nature of genetic material was not defined from his
experiments.

Biochemical Characterisation of Transforming Principle
Prior to the work of Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty
(1933-44), the genetic material was thought to be a protein. They worked
to determine the biochemical nature of ‘transforming principle’ in Griffith's
experiment.
    They purified biochemicals (proteins, DNA, RNA, etc.) from the
heat-killed S cells to see which ones could transform live R cells into
S cells. They discovered that DNA alone from S bacteria caused R bacteria
to become transformed.
    They also discovered that protein-digesting enzymes (proteases) and
RNA-digesting enzymes (RNases) did not affect transformation, so the
transforming substance was not a protein or RNA. Digestion with DNase
did inhibit transformation, suggesting that the DNA caused the
transformation. They concluded that DNA is the hereditary material, but
not all biologists were convinced.
    Can you think of any difference between DNAs and DNase?

6.2.1 The Genetic Material is DNA
The unequivocal proof that DNA is the genetic material came from the
experiments of Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase (1952). They worked
with viruses that infect bacteria called bacteriophages.
    The bacteriophage attaches to the bacteria and its genetic material
then enters the bacterial cell. The bacterial cell treats the viral genetic
material as if it was its own and subsequently manufactures more virus
particles. Hershey and Chase worked to discover whether it was protein
or DNA from the viruses that entered the bacteria.
    They grew some viruses on a medium that contained radioactive
phosphorus and some others on medium that contained radioactive sulfur.         101
Viruses grown in the presence of radioactive phosphorus contained
radioactive DNA but not radioactive protein because DNA contains
phosphorus but protein does not. Similarly, viruses grown on radioactive
sulfur contained radioactive protein but not radioactive DNA because
DNA does not contain sulfur.




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY

          Radioactive phages were allowed to attach to E. coli bacteria. Then, as
      the infection proceeded, the viral coats were removed from the bacteria by
      agitating them in a blender. The virus particles were separated from the
      bacteria by spinning them in a centrifuge.
          Bacteria which was infected with viruses that had radioactive DNA
      were radioactive, indicating that DNA was the material that passed from
      the virus to the bacteria. Bacteria that were infected with viruses that had
      radioactive proteins were not radioactive. This indicates that proteins did
      not enter the bacteria from the viruses. DNA is therefore the genetic
      material that is passed from virus to bacteria (Figure 6.5).




                      Figure 6.5 The Hershey-Chase experiment

102
      6.2.2 Properties of Genetic Material (DNA versus RNA)
      From the foregoing discussion, it is clear that the debate between proteins
      versus DNA as the genetic material was unequivocally resolved from
      Hershey-Chase experiment. It became an established fact that it is DNA
      that acts as genetic material. However, it subsequently became clear that




                                                                          2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

in some viruses, RNA is the genetic material (for example, Tobacco Mosaic
viruses, QB bacteriophage, etc.). Answer to some of the questions such as,
why DNA is the predominant genetic material, whereas RNA performs
dynamic functions of messenger and adapter has to be found from the
differences between chemical structures of the two nucleic acid molecules.
   Can you recall the two chemical differences between DNA and RNA?
    A molecule that can act as a genetic material must fulfill the following
criteria:
       (i) It should be able to generate its replica (Replication).
      (ii) It should chemically and structurally be stable.
     (iii) It should provide the scope for slow changes (mutation) that
           are required for evolution.
     (iv) It should be able to express itself in the form of 'Mendelian
          Characters’.
    If one examines each requirement one by one, because of rule of base
pairing and complementarity, both the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) have
the ability to direct their duplications. The other molecules in the living
system, such as proteins fail to fulfill first criteria itself.
    The genetic material should be stable enough not to change with
different stages of life cycle, age or with change in physiology of the
organism. Stability as one of the properties of genetic material was very
evident in Griffith’s ‘transforming principle’ itself that heat, which killed
the bacteria, at least did not destroy some of the properties of genetic
material. This now can easily be explained in light of the DNA that the
two strands being complementary if separated by heating come together,
when appropriate conditions are provided. Further, 2' -OH group present
at every nucleotide in RNA is a reactive group and makes RNA labile and
easily degradable. RNA is also now known to be catalytic, hence reactive.
Therefore, DNA chemically is less reactive and structurally more stable
when compared to RNA. Therefore, among the two nucleic acids, the DNA
is a better genetic material.
    In fact, the presence of thymine at the place of uracil also confers
additional stability to DNA. (Detailed discussion about this requires
understanding of the process of repair in DNA, and you will study these
processes in higher classes.)
    Both DNA and RNA are able to mutate. In fact, RNA being unstable,
mutate at a faster rate. Consequently, viruses having RNA genome and            103
having shorter life span mutate and evolve faster.
    RNA can directly code for the synthesis of proteins, hence can easily
express the characters. DNA, however, is dependent on RNA for synthesis
of proteins. The protein synthesising machinery has evolved around RNA.
The above discussion indicate that both RNA and DNA can function as




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                                                 BIOLOGY

                         genetic material, but DNA being more stable is preferred for storage of
                         genetic information. For the transmission of genetic information, RNA
                         is better.

                         6.3 RNA WORLD
                         From foregoing discussion, an immediate question becomes evident –
                         which is the first genetic material? It shall be discussed in detail in the
                         chapter on chemical evolution, but briefly, we shall highlight some of the
                         facts and points.
                             RNA was the first genetic material. There is now enough evidence to
                         suggest that essential life processes (such as metabolism, translation,
                                             splicing, etc.), evolved around RNA. RNA used to act as
                                             a genetic material as well as a catalyst (there are some
                                             important biochemical reactions in living systems that
                                             are catalysed by RNA catalysts and not by protein
                                             enzymes). But, RNA being a catalyst was reactive and
                                             hence unstable. Therefore, DNA has evolved from RNA
                                             with chemical modifications that make it more stable.
                                             DNA being double stranded and having complementary
                                             strand further resists changes by evolving a process of
                                             repair.

                                              6.4 REPLICATION
                                                 While proposing the double helical structure for DNA,
                                                 Watson and Crick had immediately proposed a scheme
                                                 for replication of DNA. To quote their original statement
                                                 that is as follows:
                                                      ‘‘It has not escaped our notice that the specific
                                                 pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a
                                                 possible copying mechanism for the genetic material’’
                                                 (Watson and Crick, 1953).
                                                      The scheme suggested that the two strands would
                                                 separate and act as a template for the synthesis of new
 Figure 6.6 Watson-Crick model for complementary strands. After the completion of
            se m i c o n s e r v a t i v e D N A replication, each DNA molecule would have one
            replication                          parental and one newly synthesised strand. This
                                                 scheme was termed as semiconservative DNA
104
                                                 replication (Figure 6.6).

                         6.4.1 The Experimental Proof
                         It is now proven that DNA replicates semiconservatively. It was shown first in
                         Escherichia coli and subsequently in higher organisms, such as plants




                                                                                                  2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

and human cells. Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl performed the
following experiment in 1958:
      (i) They grew E. coli in a medium containing 15NH4Cl (15N is the heavy
          isotope of nitrogen) as the only nitrogen source for many
          generations. The result was that 15N was incorporated into newly
          synthesised DNA (as well as other nitrogen containing compounds).
          This heavy DNA molecule could be distinguished from the normal
          DNA by centrifugation in a cesium chloride (CsCl) density gradient
          (Please note that 15N is not a radioactive isotope, and it can be
          separated from 14N only based on densities).
     (ii) Then they transferred the cells into a medium with normal
          14
            NH4Cl and took samples at various definite time intervals as
          the cells multiplied, and extracted the DNA that remained as
          double-stranded helices. The various samples were separated
          independently on CsCl gradients to measure the densities of
          DNA (Figure 6.7).
         Can you recall what centrifugal force is, and think why a
         molecule with higher mass/density would sediment faster?
         The results are shown in Figure 6.7.




                          Figure 6.7 Meselson and Stahl’s Experiment
                                                                               105
    (iii) Thus, the DNA that was extracted from the culture one
          generation after the transfer from 15N to 14N medium [that is
          after 20 minutes; E. coli divides in 20 minutes] had a hybrid or
          intermediate density. DNA extracted from the culture after
          another generation [that is after 40 minutes, II generation] was




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY

                composed of equal amounts of this hybrid DNA and of ‘light’
                DNA.
      If E. coli was allowed to grow for 80 minutes then what would be the
      proportions of light and hybrid densities DNA molecule?
          Very similar experiments involving use of radioactive thymidine to
      detect distribution of newly synthesised DNA in the chromosomes was
      performed on Vicia faba (faba beans) by Taylor and colleagues in 1958.
      The experiments proved that the DNA in chromosomes also replicate
      semiconservatively.

      6.4.2 The Machinery and the Enzymes
       In living cells, such as E. coli, the process of replication requires a set of
      catalysts (enzymes). The main enzyme is referred to as DNA-dependent
      DNA polymerase, since it uses a DNA template to catalyse the
      polymerisation of deoxynucleotides. These enzymes are highly efficient
      enzymes as they have to catalyse polymerisation of a large number of
      nucleotides in a very short time. E. coli that has only 4.6 × 106 bp (compare
      it with human whose diploid content is 6.6 × 109 bp), completes the
      process of replication within 18 minutes; that means the average rate of
      polymerisation has to be approximately 2000 bp per second. Not only do
      these polymerases have to be fast, but they also have to catalyse the reaction
      with high degree of accuracy. Any mistake during replication would result
      into mutations. Furthermore, energetically replication is a very expensive
      process. Deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates serve dual purposes. In
      addition to acting as substrates, they provide energy for polymerisation
      reaction (the two terminal phosphates in a deoxynucleoside triphosphates
      are high-energy phosphates, same as in case of ATP).
           In addition to DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, many additional
      enzymes are required to complete the process of replication with high
      degree of accuracy. For long DNA molecules, since the two strands of
      DNA cannot be separated in its entire length (due to very high energy
      requirement), the replication occur within a small opening of the DNA
      helix, referred to as replication fork. The DNA-dependent DNA
      polymerases catalyse polymerisation only in one direction, that is 5' à3' .
      This creates some additional complications at the replicating fork.
      Consequently, on one strand (the template with polarity 3' à5' ), the
      replication is continuous, while on the other (the template with
106   polarity 5' à3' ), it is discontinuous. The discontinuously synthesised
      fragments are later joined by the enzyme DNA ligase (Figure 6.8).
           The DNA polymerases on their own cannot initiate the process of
      replication. Also the replication does not initiate randomly at any place
      in DNA. There is a definite region in E. coli DNA where the replication
      originates. Such regions are termed as origin of replication. It is




                                                                             2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

because of the requirement of the origin of
replication that a piece of DNA if needed to be
propagated during recombinant DNA procedures,
requires a vector. The vectors provide the origin of
replication.
    Further, not every detail of replication is
understood well. In eukaryotes, the replication of
DNA takes place at S-phase of the cell-cycle. The
replication of DNA and cell division cycle should be
highly coordinated. A failure in cell division after
DNA replication results into polyploidy(a
chromosomal anomaly). You will learn the detailed
nature of origin and the processes occurring at this
site, in higher classes.

6.5 TRANSCRIPTION
The process of copying genetic information from one
                                                                    Figure 6.8 Replicating Fork
strand of the DNA into RNA is termed as
transcription. Here also, the principle of
complementarity governs the process of transcription, except the adenosine
now forms base pair with uracil instead of thymine. However, unlike in
the process of replication, which once set in, the total DNA of an organism
gets duplicated, in transcription only a segment of DNA and only one of
the strands is copied into RNA. This necessitates defining the boundaries
that would demarcate the region and the strand of DNA that would be
transcribed.
    Why both the strands are not copied during transcription has the
simple answer. First, if both strands act as a template, they would code
for RNA molecule with different sequences (Remember complementarity
does not mean identical), and in turn, if they code for proteins, the sequence
of amino acids in the proteins would be different. Hence, one segment of
the DNA would be coding for two different proteins, and this would
complicate the genetic information transfer machinery. Second, the two
RNA molecules if produced simultaneously would be complementary to
each other, hence would form a double stranded RNA. This would prevent
RNA from being translated into protein and the exercise of transcription
would become a futile one.

6.5.1 Transcription Unit                                                                          107
A transcription unit in DNA is defined primarily by the three regions in
the DNA :
   (i) A Promoter
  (ii) The Structural gene
 (iii) A Terminator




                                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                               BIOLOGY

               There is a convention in defining the two strands of the DNA in the
           structural gene of a transcription unit. Since the two strands have opposite
           polarity and the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase also catalyse the
           polymerisation in only one direction, that is, 5' →3' , the strand that has
           the polarity 3' →5' acts as a template, and is also referred to as template
           strand. The other strand which has the polarity (5' →3' ) and the sequence
           same as RNA (except thymine at the place of uracil), is displaced during
           transcription. Strangely, this strand (which does not code for anything)
           is referred to as coding strand. All the reference point while defining a
           transcription unit is made with coding strand. To explain the point, a
           hypothetical sequence from a transcription unit is represented below:
                  3' -ATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGC-5'                Template Strand
                  5' -TACGTACGTACGTACGTACGTACG-3'                Coding Strand
           Can you now write the sequence of RNA transcribed from the above DNA?




      Figure 6.9 Schematic structure of a transcription unit


               The promoter and terminator flank the structural gene in a
           transcription unit. The promoter is said to be located towards 5' -end
           (upstream) of the structural gene (the reference is made with respect to
           the polarity of coding strand). It is a DNA sequence that provides binding
           site for RNA polymerase, and it is the presence of a promoter in a
           transcription unit that also defines the template and coding strands. By
           switching its position with terminator, the definition of coding and template
           strands could be reversed. The terminator is located towards 3' -end
           (downstream) of the coding strand and it usually defines the end of the
           process of transcription (Figure 6.9). There are additional regulatory
           sequences that may be present further upstream or downstream to the
108        promoter. Some of the properties of these sequences shall be discussed
           while dealing with regulation of gene expression.

           6.5.2 Transcription Unit and the Gene
           A gene is defined as the functional unit of inheritance. Though there is no
           ambiguity that the genes are located on the DNA, it is difficult to literally




                                                                                2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

define a gene in terms of DNA sequence. The DNA sequence coding for
tRNA or rRNA molecule also define a gene. However by defining a cistron
as a segment of DNA coding for a polypeptide, the structural gene in a
transcription unit could be said as monocistronic (mostly in eukaryotes)
or polycistronic (mostly in bacteria or prokaryotes). In eukaryotes, the
monocistronic structural genes have interrupted coding sequences – the
genes in eukaryotes are split. The coding sequences or expressed
sequences are defined as exons. Exons are said to be those sequence
that appear in mature or processed RNA. The exons are interrupted by
introns. Introns or intervening sequences do not appear in mature or
processed RNA. The split-gene arrangement further complicates the
definition of a gene in terms of a DNA segment.
    Inheritance of a character is also affected by promoter and regulatory
sequences of a structural gene. Hence, sometime the regulatory sequences
are loosely defined as regulatory genes, even though these sequences do
not code for any RNA or protein.


6.5.3 Types of RNA and the process of Transcription
In bacteria, there are three major types of RNAs: mRNA (messenger RNA),
tRNA (transfer RNA), and rRNA (ribosomal RNA). All three RNAs are
needed to synthesise a protein in a cell. The mRNA provides the template,
tRNA brings aminoacids and reads the genetic code, and rRNAs play
structural and catalytic role during translation. There is single
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that catalyses transcription of all types
of RNA in bacteria. RNA polymerase binds to promoter and initiates
transcription (Initiation). It uses nucleoside triphosphates as substrate




                                                                             109




             Figure 6.10 Process of Transcription in Bacteria




                                                                              2017-18
                                                                        BIOLOGY

      and polymerises in a template depended fashion following the rule of
      complementarity. It somehow also facilitates opening of the helix and
      continues elongation. Only a short stretch of RNA remains bound to the
      enzyme. Once the polymerases reaches the terminator region, the nascent
      RNA falls off, so also the RNA polymerase. This results in termination of
      transcription.
          An intriguing question is that how is the RNA polymerases able
      to catalyse all the three steps, which are initiation, elongation and
      termination. The RNA polymerase is only capable of catalysing the
      process of elongation. It associates transiently with initiation-factor (σ)
      and termination-factor (ρ) to initiate and terminate the transcription,
      respectively. Association with these factors alter the specificity of the
      RNA polymerase to either initiate or terminate (Figure 6.10).
          In bacteria, since the mRNA does not require any processing to become
      active, and also since transcription and translation take place in the same
      compartment (there is no separation of cytosol and nucleus in bacteria),
      many times the translation can begin much before the mRNA is fully
      transcribed. Consequently, the transcription and translation can be coupled
      in bacteria.
          In eukaryotes, there are two additional complexities –
      (i) There are at least three RNA polymerases in the nucleus (in addition
          to the RNA polymerase found in the organelles). There is a clear
          cut division of labour. The RNA polymerase I transcribes rRNAs




110




                 Figure 6.11 Process of Transcription in Eukaryotes




                                                                         2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

     (28S, 18S, and 5.8S), whereas the RNA polymerase III is responsible
     for transcription of tRNA, 5srRNA, and snRNAs (small nuclear
     RNAs). The RNA polymerase II transcribes precursor of mRNA, the
     heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA).
(ii) The second complexity is that the primary transcripts contain both
     the exons and the introns and are non-functional. Hence, it is
     subjected to a process called splicing where the introns are removed
     and exons are joined in a defined order. hnRNA undergoes
     additional processing called as capping and tailing. In capping an
     unusual nucleotide (methyl guanosine triphosphate) is added to
     the 5'-end of hnRNA. In tailing, adenylate residues (200-300) are
     added at 3'-end in a template independent manner. It is the fully
     processed hnRNA, now called mRNA, that is transported out of the
     nucleus for translation (Figure 6.11).
     The significance of such complexities is now beginning to be
understood. The split-gene arrangements represent probably an ancient
feature of the genome. The presence of introns is reminiscent of antiquity,
and the process of splicing represents the dominance of RNA-world. In
recent times, the understanding of RNA and RNA-dependent processes
in the living system have assumed more importance.

6.6 GENETIC CODE
During replication and transcription a nucleic acid was copied to form
another nucleic acid. Hence, these processes are easy to conceptualise
on the basis of complementarity. The process of translation requires
transfer of genetic information from a polymer of nucleotides to a polymer
of amino acids. Neither does any complementarity exist between
nucleotides and amino acids, nor could any be drawn theoretically. There
existed ample evidences, though, to support the notion that change in
nucleic acids (genetic material) were responsible for change in amino acids
in proteins. This led to the proposition of a genetic code that could direct
the sequence of amino acids during synthesis of proteins.
    If determining the biochemical nature of genetic material and the
structure of DNA was very exciting, the proposition and deciphering of
genetic code were most challenging. In a very true sense, it required
involvement of scientists from several disciplines – physicists, organic
chemists, biochemists and geneticists. It was George Gamow, a physicist,
who argued that since there are only 4 bases and if they have to code for
20 amino acids, the code should constitute a combination of bases. He          111
suggested that in order to code for all the 20 amino acids, the code should
be made up of three nucleotides. This was a very bold proposition, because
a permutation combination of 43 (4 × 4 × 4) would generate 64 codons;
generating many more codons than required.
    Providing proof that the codon was a triplet, was a more daunting
task. The chemical method developed by Har Gobind Khorana was




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY

      instrumental in synthesising RNA molecules with defined combinations
      of bases (homopolymers and copolymers). Marshall Nirenberg’s cell-free
      system for protein synthesis finally helped the code to be deciphered.
      Severo Ochoa enzyme (polynucleotide phosphorylase) was also helpful
      in polymerising RNA with defined sequences in a template independent
      manner (enzymatic synthesis of RNA). Finally a checker-board for genetic
      code was prepared which is given in Table 6.1.
                   Table 6.1: The Codons for the Various Amino Acids




      The salient features of genetic code are as follows:
              (i) The codon is triplet. 61 codons code for amino acids and 3 codons do
                  not code for any amino acids, hence they function as stop codons.
             (ii) One codon codes for only one amino acid, hence, it is
                  unambiguous and specific.
           (iii) Some amino acids are coded by more than one codon, hence
                  the code is degenerate.
            (iv) The codon is read in mRNA in a contiguous fashion. There are
                  no punctuations.
             (v) The code is nearly universal: for example, from bacteria to human
                  UUU would code for Phenylalanine (phe). Some exceptions to this
                  rule have been found in mitochondrial codons, and in some
112               protozoans.
            (vi) AUG has dual functions. It codes for Methionine (met) , and it
                  also act as initiator codon.
         If following is the sequence of nucleotides in mRNA, predict the
      sequence of amino acid coded by it (take help of the checkerboard):
         -AUG UUU UUC UUC UUU UUU UUC-




                                                                              2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

   Now try the opposite. Following is the sequence of amino acids coded
by an mRNA. Predict the nucleotide sequence in the RNA:
   Met-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe
   Do you face any difficulty in predicting the opposite?
   Can you now correlate which two properties of genetic code you have
learnt?

6.6.1 Mutations and Genetic Code
The relationships between genes and DNA are best understood by mutation
studies. You have studied about mutation and its effect in Chapter 5. Effects
of large deletions and rearrangements in a segment of DNA are easy to
comprehend. It may result in loss or gain of a gene and so a function. The
effect of point mutations will be explained here. A classical example of
point mutation is a change of single base pair in the gene for beta globin
chain that results in the change of amino acid residue glutamate to valine.
It results into a diseased condition called as sickle cell anemia. Effect of
point mutations that inserts or deletes a base in structural gene can be
better understood by following simple example.
     Consider a statement that is made up of the following words each
having three letters like genetic code.
   RAM HAS RED CAP
    If we insert a letter B in between HAS and RED and rearrange the
statement, it would read as follows:
   RAM HAS BRE DCA P
   Similarly, if we now insert two letters at the same place, say BI'. Now it
would read,
   RAM HAS BIR EDC AP
   Now we insert three letters together, say BIG, the statement would read
   RAM HAS BIG RED CAP
   The same exercise can be repeated, by deleting the letters R, E and D,
one by one and rearranging the statement to make a triplet word.
   RAM HAS EDC AP
   RAM HAS DCA P
                                                                                113
   RAM HAS CAP
    The conclusion from the above exercise is very obvious. Insertion or
deletion of one or two bases changes the reading frame from the point of
insertion or deletion. However, such mutations are referred to as




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                              BIOLOGY

          frameshift insertion or deletion mutations. Insertion or deletion of
          three or its multiple bases insert or delete in one or multiple codon hence
          one or multiple amino acids, and reading frame remains unaltered from
          that point onwards.

          6.6.2 tRNA– the Adapter Molecule
          From the very beginning of the proposition of code, it was clear to Francis
          Crick that there has to be a mechanism to read the code and also to link it
          to the amino acids, because amino acids have no structural specialities to
          read the code uniquely. He postulated the presence of an adapter molecule
          that would on one hand read the code and on other hand would bind
          to specific amino acids. The tRNA, then called sRNA (soluble RNA),
          was known before the genetic code was postulated. However, its role
          as an adapter molecule was assigned much later.
                                                                       tRNA has an
                                                                  anticodon loop
                                                                  that has bases
                                                                  complementary to
                                                                  the code, and it also
                                                                  has an amino acid
                                                                  acceptor end to
                                                                  which it binds to
                                                                  amino        acids.
                                                                  tRNAs are specific
                                                                  for each amino acid
                                                                  (Figure 6.12). For
      Figure 6.12 tRNA - the adapter molecule                     initiation, there is
          another specific tRNA that is referred to as initiator tRNA. There are no
          tRNAs for stop codons. In figure 6.12, the secondary structure of tRNA
          has been depicted that looks like a clover-leaf. In actual structure, the
          tRNA is a compact molecule which looks like inverted L.

          6.7 TRANSLATION
          Translation refers to the process of polymerisation of amino acids to
          form a polypeptide (Figure 6.13). The order and sequence of amino acids
          are defined by the sequence of bases in the mRNA. The amino acids are
          joined by a bond which is known as a peptide bond. Formation of a
          peptide bond requires energy. Therefore, in the first phase itself amino
114       acids are activated in the presence of ATP and linked to their cognate
          tRNA – a process commonly called as charging of tRNA or
          aminoacylation of tRNA to be more specific. If two such charged tRNAs
          are brought close enough, the formation of peptide bond between them




                                                                               2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

would be favoured energetically. The
presence of a catalyst would enhance
the rate of peptide bond formation.
    The cellular factory responsible for
synthesising proteins is the ribosome.
The ribosome consists of structural
RNAs and about 80 different proteins.
In its inactive state, it exists as two
subunits; a large subunit and a small
subunit. When the small subunit
encounters an mRNA, the process of
translation of the mRNA to protein
begins. There are two sites in the large
subunit, for subsequent amino acids
to bind to and thus, be close enough                           Figure 6.13 Translation
to each other for the formation of a
peptide bond. The ribosome also acts as a catalyst (23S rRNA in bacteria
is the enzyme- ribozyme) for the formation of peptide bond.
    A translational unit in mRNA is the sequence of RNA that is flanked
by the start codon (AUG) and the stop codon and codes for a polypeptide.
An mRNA also has some additional sequences that are not translated
and are referred as untranslated regions (UTR). The UTRs are present
at both 5' -end (before start codon) and at 3' -end (after stop codon). They
are required for efficient translation process.
    For initiation, the ribosome binds to the mRNA at the start codon (AUG)
that is recognised only by the initiator tRNA. The ribosome proceeds to the
elongation phase of protein synthesis. During this stage, complexes
composed of an amino acid linked to tRNA, sequentially bind to the
appropriate codon in mRNA by forming complementary base pairs with
the tRNA anticodon. The ribosome moves from codon to codon along the
mRNA. Amino acids are added one by one, translated into Polypeptide
sequences dictated by DNA and represented by mRNA. At the end, a release
factor binds to the stop codon, terminating translation and releasing the
complete polypeptide from the ribosome.

6.8 REGULATION       OF   GENE EXPRESSION
Regulation of gene expression refers to a very broad term that may occur
at various levels. Considering that gene expression results in the formation
of a polypeptide, it can be regulated at several levels. In eukaryotes, the              115
regulation could be exerted at
   (i) transcriptional level (formation of primary transcript),
  (ii) processing level (regulation of splicing),
 (iii) transport of mRNA from nucleus to the cytoplasm,
 (iv) translational level.




                                                                                          2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY

           The genes in a cell are expressed to perform a particular function or a
      set of functions. For example, if an enzyme called beta-galactosidase is
      synthesised by E. coli, it is used to catalyse the hydrolysis of a
      disaccharide, lactose into galactose and glucose; the bacteria use them
      as a source of energy. Hence, if the bacteria do not have lactose around
      them to be utilised for energy source, they would no longer require the
      synthesis of the enzyme beta-galactosidase. Therefore, in simple terms,
      it is the metabolic, physiological or environmental conditions that regulate
      the expression of genes. The development and differentiation of embryo
      into adult organisms are also a result of the coordinated regulation of
      expression of several sets of genes.
           In prokaryotes, control of the rate of transcriptional initiation is the
      predominant site for control of gene expression. In a transcription unit,
      the activity of RNA polymerase at a given promoter is in turn regulated
      by interaction with accessory proteins, which affect its ability to recognise
      start sites. These regulatory proteins can act both positively (activators)
      and negatively (repressors). The accessibility of promoter regions of
      prokaryotic DNA is in many cases regulated by the interaction of proteins
      with sequences termed operators. The operator region is adjacent to the
      promoter elements in most operons and in most cases the sequences of
      the operator bind a repressor protein. Each operon has its specific
      operator and specific repressor. For example, lac operator is present
      only in the lac operon and it interacts specifically with lac repressor only.

      6.8.1 The Lac operon
      The elucidation of the lac operon was also a result of a close association
      between a geneticist, Francois Jacob and a biochemist, Jacque Monod. They
      were the first to elucidate a transcriptionally regulated system. In lac operon
      (here lac refers to lactose), a polycistronic structural gene is regulated by a
      common promoter and regulatory genes. Such arrangement is very common
      in bacteria and is referred to as operon. To name few such examples, lac
      operon, trp operon, ara operon, his operon, val operon, etc.
          The lac operon consists of one regulatory gene (the i gene – here the
      term i does not refer to inducer, rather it is derived from the word inhibitor)
      and three structural genes (z, y, and a). The i gene codes for the repressor
      of the lac operon. The z gene codes for beta-galactosidase (β-gal), which
      is primarily responsible for the hydrolysis of the disaccharide, lactose
116   into its monomeric units, galactose and glucose. The y gene codes for
      permease, which increases permeability of the cell to β-galactosides. The
      a gene encodes a transacetylase. Hence, all the three gene products in
      lac operon are required for metabolism of lactose. In most other operons
      as well, the genes present in the operon are needed together to function
      in the same or related metabolic pathway (Figure 6.14).




                                                                             2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE




                                    Figure 6.14 The lac Operon


    Lactose is the substrate for the enzyme beta-galactosidase and it
regulates switching on and off of the operon. Hence, it is termed as
inducer. In the absence of a preferred carbon source such as glucose, if
lactose is provided in the growth medium of the bacteria, the lactose is
transported into the cells through the action of permease (Remember, a
very low level of expression of lac operon has to be present in the cell all
the time, otherwise lactose cannot enter the cells). The lactose then induces
the operon in the following manner.
    The repressor of the operon is synthesised (all-the-time – constitutively)
from the i gene. The repressor protein binds to the operator region of the
operon and prevents RNA polymerase from transcribing the operon. In
the presence of an inducer, such as lactose or allolactose, the repressor is
inactivated by interaction with the inducer. This allows RNA polymerase
access to the promoter and transcription proceeds (Figure 6.14).
Essentially, regulation of lac operon can also be visualised as regulation
of enzyme synthesis by its substrate.
    Remember, glucose or galactose cannot act as inducers for lac
                                                                                 117
operon. Can you think for how long the lac operon would be expressed
in the presence of lactose?
    Regulation of lac operon by repressor is referred to as negative
regulation. Lac operon is under control of positive regulation as well,
but it is beyond the scope of discussion at this level.




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


      6.9 HUMAN GENOME PROJECT
      In the preceding sections you have learnt that it is the sequence of bases in
      DNA that determines the genetic information of a given organism. In other
      words, genetic make-up of an organism or an individual lies in the DNA
      sequences. If two individuals differ, then their DNA sequences should also
      be different, at least at some places. These assumptions led to the quest of
      finding out the complete DNA sequence of human genome. With the
      establishment of genetic engineering techniques where it was possible to
      isolate and clone any piece of DNA and availability of simple and fast
      techniques for determining DNA sequences, a very ambitious project of
      sequencing human genome was launched in the year 1990.
          Human Genome Project (HGP) was called a mega project. You can
      imagine the magnitude and the requirements for the project if we simply
      define the aims of the project as follows:
          Human genome is said to have approximately 3 x 109 bp, and if the
      cost of sequencing required is US $ 3 per bp (the estimated cost in the
      beginning), the total estimated cost of the project would be approximately
      9 billion US dollars. Further, if the obtained sequences were to be stored
      in typed form in books, and if each page of the book contained 1000
      letters and each book contained 1000 pages, then 3300 such books would
      be required to store the information of DNA sequence from a single human
      cell. The enormous amount of data expected to be generated also
      necessitated the use of high speed computational devices for data storage
      and retrieval, and analysis. HGP was closely associated with the rapid
      development of a new area in biology called Bioinformatics.

      Goals of HGP
      Some of the important goals of HGP were as follows:
          (i) Identify all the approximately 20,000-25,000 genes in human DNA;
         (ii) Determine the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs that
              make up human DNA;
        (iiii) Store this information in databases;
         (iv) Improve tools for data analysis;
         (v) Transfer related technologies to other sectors, such as industries;
         (vi) Address the ethical, legal, and social issues (ELSI) that may arise
              from the project.
          The Human Genome Project was a 13-year project coordinated by
118   the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institute of Health. During
      the early years of the HGP, the Wellcome Trust (U.K.) became a major
      partner; additional contributions came from Japan, France, Germany,
      China and others. The project was completed in 2003. Knowledge about
      the effects of DNA variations among individuals can lead to revolutionary
      new ways to diagnose, treat and someday prevent the thousands of




                                                                           2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

disorders that affect human beings. Besides providing clues to
understanding human biology, learning about non-human organisms
DNA sequences can lead to an understanding of their natural capabilities
that can be applied toward solving challenges in health care, agriculture,
energy production, environmental remediation. Many non-human model
organisms, such as bacteria, yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans (a free living
non-pathogenic nematode), Drosophila (the fruit fly), plants (rice and
Arabidopsis), etc., have also been sequenced.
Methodologies : The methods involved two major approaches. One
approach focused on identifying all the genes that are expressed as
RNA (referred to as Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs). The other took
the blind approach of simply sequencing the whole set of genome that
contained all the coding and non-coding sequence, and later assigning
different regions in the sequence with functions (a term referred to as
Sequence Annotation). For sequencing, the total DNA from a cell is
isolated and converted into random fragments of relatively smaller sizes
(recall DNA is a very long polymer, and there are technical limitations in
sequencing very long pieces of DNA) and cloned in suitable host using
specialised vectors. The cloning resulted into amplification of each piece
of DNA fragment so that it subsequently could be sequenced with ease.
The commonly used hosts were bacteria and yeast, and the vectors were
called as BAC (bacterial artificial chromosomes), and YAC (yeast artificial
chromosomes).
    The fragments were sequenced using automated DNA sequencers that
worked on the principle of a method developed by Frederick Sanger.
(Remember, Sanger is also credited for developing method for
determination of amino acid
sequences in proteins). These
sequences were then arranged based
on some overlapping regions
present in them. This required
generation of overlapping fragments
for sequencing. Alignment of these
sequences was humanly not
possible. Therefore, specialised
computer based programs were
developed (Figure 6.15). These
sequences were subsequently
annotated and were assigned to each
                                                                                         119
chromosome. The sequence of
chromosome 1 was completed only
in May 2006 (this was the last of the
24 human chromosomes – 22                Figure 6.15 A representative diagram of human
autosomes and X and Y – to be                        genome project




                                                                                          2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY

      sequenced). Another challenging task was assigning the genetic and
      physical maps on the genome. This was generated using information on
      polymorphism of restriction endonuclease recognition sites, and some
      repetitive DNA sequences known as microsatellites (one of the applications
      of polymorphism in repetitive DNA sequences shall be explained in next
      section of DNA fingerprinting).

      6.9.1 Salient Features of Human Genome
      Some of the salient observations drawn from human genome project are
      as follows:
         (i) The human genome contains 3164.7 million nucleotide bases.
         (ii) The average gene consists of 3000 bases, but sizes vary greatly, with
              the largest known human gene being dystrophin at 2.4 million bases.
        (iii) The total number of genes is estimated at 30,000– much lower
              than previous estimates of 80,000 to 1,40,000 genes. Almost all
              (99.9 per cent) nucleotide bases are exactly the same in all people.
        (iv) The functions are unknown for over 50 per cent of the discovered
             genes.
         (v) Less than 2 per cent of the genome codes for proteins.
        (vi) Repeated sequences make up very large portion of the human genome.
       (vii) Repetitive sequences are stretches of DNA sequences that are
             repeated many times, sometimes hundred to thousand times. They
             are thought to have no direct coding functions, but they shed light
             on chromosome structure, dynamics and evolution.
       (viii) Chromosome 1 has most genes (2968), and the Y has the fewest (231).
        (ix) Scientists have identified about 1.4 million locations where single-
             base DNA differences (SNPs – single nucleotide polymorphism,
             pronounced as ‘snips’) occur in humans. This information promises
             to revolutionise the processes of finding chromosomal locations for
             disease-associated sequences and tracing human history.

      6.9.2 Applications and Future Challenges
      Deriving meaningful knowledge from the DNA sequences will define
      research through the coming decades leading to our understanding of
      biological systems. This enormous task will require the expertise and
120   creativity of tens of thousands of scientists from varied disciplines in both
      the public and private sectors worldwide. One of the greatest impacts of
      having the HG sequence may well be enabling a radically new approach
      to biological research. In the past, researchers studied one or a few genes
      at a time. With whole-genome sequences and new high-throughput
      technologies, we can approach questions systematically and on a much




                                                                           2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

broader scale. They can study all the genes in a genome, for example, all
the transcripts in a particular tissue or organ or tumor, or how tens of
thousands of genes and proteins work together in interconnected networks
to orchestrate the chemistry of life.

6.10 DNA FINGERPRINTING
As stated in the preceding section, 99.9 per cent of base sequence among
humans is the same. Assuming human genome as 3 × 109 bp, in how
many base sequences would there be differences? It is these differences
in sequence of DNA which make every individual unique in their
phenotypic appearance. If one aims to find out genetic differences
between two individuals or among individuals of a population,
sequencing the DNA every time would be a daunting and expensive
                                                           6
task. Imagine trying to compare two sets of 3 × 10 base pairs. DNA
fingerprinting is a very quick way to compare the DNA sequences of any
two individuals.
    DNA fingerprinting involves identifying differences in some specific
regions in DNA sequence called as repetitive DNA, because in these
sequences, a small stretch of DNA is repeated many times. These repetitive
DNA are separated from bulk genomic DNA as different peaks during
density gradient centrifugation. The bulk DNA forms a major peak and
the other small peaks are referred to as satellite DNA. Depending on
base composition (A : T rich or G:C rich), length of segment, and number
of repetitive units, the satellite DNA is classified into many categories,
such as micro-satellites, mini-satellites etc. These sequences normally
do not code for any proteins, but they form a large portion of human
genome. These sequence show high degree of polymorphism and form
the basis of DNA fingerprinting. Since DNA from every tissue (such as
blood, hair-follicle, skin, bone, saliva, sperm etc.), from an individual
show the same degree of polymorphism, they become very useful
identification tool in forensic applications. Further, as the polymorphisms
are inheritable from parents to children, DNA fingerprinting is the basis
of paternity testing, in case of disputes.
    As polymorphism in DNA sequence is the basis of genetic mapping
of human genome as well as of DNA fingerprinting, it is essential that we
understand what DNA polymorphism means in simple terms.
Polymorphism (variation at genetic level) arises due to mutations. (Recall
different kind of mutations and their effects that you have already
studied in Chapter 5, and in the preceding sections in this chapter.)         121
New mutations may arise in an individual either in somatic cells or in
the germ cells (cells that generate gametes in sexually reproducing
organisms). If a germ cell mutation does not seriously impair individual’s
ability to have offspring who can transmit the mutation, it can spread to




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY

      the other members of population (through sexual reproduction). Allelic
      (again recall the definition of alleles from Chapter 5) sequence variation
      has traditionally been described as a DNA polymorphism if more than
      one variant (allele) at a locus occurs in human population with a
      frequency greater than 0.01. In simple terms, if an inheritable mutation
      is observed in a population at high frequency, it is referred to as DNA
      polymorphism. The probability of such variation to be observed in non-
      coding DNA sequence would be higher as mutations in these sequences
      may not have any immediate effect/impact in an individual’s
      reproductive ability. These mutations keep on accumulating generation
      after generation, and form one of the basis of variability/polymorphism.
      There is a variety of different types of polymorphisms ranging from single
      nucleotide change to very large scale changes. For evolution and
      speciation, such polymorphisms play very important role, and you will
      study these in details at higher classes.
          The technique of DNA Fingerprinting was initially developed by Alec
      Jeffreys. He used a satellite DNA as probe that shows very high degree
      of polymorphism. It was called as Variable Number of Tandem Repeats
      (VNTR). The technique, as used earlier, involved Southern blot
      hybridisation using radiolabelled VNTR as a probe. It included
        (i) isolation of DNA,
       (ii) digestion of DNA by restriction endonucleases,
      (iii) separation of DNA fragments by electrophoresis,
      (iv) transferring (blotting) of separated DNA fragments to synthetic
           membranes, such as nitrocellulose or nylon,
       (v) hybridisation using labelled VNTR probe, and
       (vi) detection of hybridised DNA fragments by autoradiography. A schematic
            representation of DNA fingerprinting is shown in Figure 6.16.
          The VNTR belongs to a class of satellite DNA referred to as mini-satellite.
      A small DNA sequence is arranged tandemly in many copy numbers. The
      copy number varies from chromosome to chromosome in an individual.
      The numbers of repeat show very high degree of polymorphism. As a
      result the size of VNTR varies in size from 0.1 to
      20 kb. Consequently, after hybridisation with VNTR probe, the
      autoradiogram gives many bands of differing sizes. These bands give a
122   characteristic pattern for an individual DNA (Figure 6.16). It differs from
      individual to individual in a population except in the case of monozygotic
      (identical) twins. The sensitivity of the technique has been increased by
      use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR–you will study about it in
      Chapter 11). Consequently, DNA from a single cell is enough to perform
      DNA fingerprinting analysis. In addition to application in forensic




                                                                             2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE




 Figure 6.16 Schematic representation of DNA fingerprinting : Few representative chromosomes
             have been shown to contain different copy number of VNTR. For the sake of
             understanding different colour schemes have been used to trace the origin of each
             band in the gel. The two alleles (paternal and maternal) of a chromosome also
             contain different copy numbers of VNTR. It is clear that the banding pattern of DNA
             from crime scene matches with individual B, and not with A.


                                                                                            123
science, it has much wider application, such as in determining
population and genetic diversities. Currently, many different probes
are used to generate DNA fingerprints.




                                                                                              2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY



                                   SUMMARY
      Nucleic acids are long polymers of nucleotides. While DNA stores genetic
      information, RNA mostly helps in transfer and expression of information.
      Though DNA and RNA both function as genetic material, but DNA being
      chemically and structurally more stable is a better genetic material.
      However, RNA is the first to evolve and DNA was derived from RNA. The
      hallmark of the double stranded helical structure of DNA is the hydrogen
      bonding between the bases from opposite strands. The rule is that
      Adenine pairs with Thymine through two H-bonds, and Guanine with
      Cytosine through three H-bonds.              This makes one strand
      complementary to the other. The DNA replicates semiconservatively,
      the process is guided by the complementary H-bonding. A segment of
      DNA that codes for RNA may in a simplistic term can be referred as
      gene. During transcription also, one of the strands of DNA acts a
      template to direct the synthesis of complementary RNA. In bacteria,
      the transcribed mRNA is functional, hence can directly be translated.
      In eukaryotes, the gene is split. The coding sequences, exons, are
      interrupted by non-coding sequences, introns. Introns are removed
      and exons are joined to produce functional RNA by splicing. The
      messenger RNA contains the base sequences that are read in a
      combination of three (to make triplet genetic code) to code for an amino
      acid. The genetic code is read again on the principle of complementarity
      by tRNA that acts as an adapter molecule. There are specific tRNAs for
      every amino acid. The tRNA binds to specific amino acid at one end
      and pairs through H-bonding with codes on mRNA through its
      anticodons. The site of translation (protein synthesis) is ribosomes,
      which bind to mRNA and provide platform for joining of amino acids.
      One of the rRNA acts as a catalyst for peptide bond formation, which is
      an example of RNA enzyme (ribozyme). Translation is a process that
      has evolved around RNA, indicating that life began around RNA. Since,
      transcription and translation are energetically very expensive
      processes, these have to be tightly regulated. Regulation of transcription
      is the primary step for regulation of gene expression. In bacteria, more
      than one gene is arranged together and regulated in units called as
      operons. Lac operon is the prototype operon in bacteria, which codes
      for genes responsible for metabolism of lactose. The operon is regulated
      by the amount of lactose in the medium where the bacteria are grown.
      Therefore, this regulation can also be viewed as regulation of enzyme
      synthesis by its substrate.
          Human genome project was a mega project that aimed to sequence
      every base in human genome. This project has yielded much new
124   information. Many new areas and avenues have opened up as a
      consequence of the project. DNA Fingerprinting is a technique to find
      out variations in individuals of a population at DNA level. It works on
      the principle of polymorphism in DNA sequences. It has immense
      applications in the field of forensic science, genetic biodiversity and
      evolutionary biology.




                                                                           2017-18
MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE



                        EXERCISES
 1    Group the following as nitrogenous bases and nucleosides:
      Adenine, Cytidine, Thymine, Guanosine, Uracil and Cytosine.
 2.   If a double stranded DNA has 20 per cent of cytosine, calculate the per
      cent of adenine in the DNA.
 3.   If the sequence of one strand of DNA is written as follows:
      5' -ATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGC-3'
      Write down the sequence of complementary strand in 5' →3' direction.
 4.   If the sequence of the coding strand in a transcription unit is written
      as follows:
      5' -ATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGC-3'
      Write down the sequence of mRNA.
 5.   Which property of DNA double helix led Watson and Crick to hypothesise
      semi-conservative mode of DNA replication? Explain.
 6.   Depending upon the chemical nature of the template (DNA or RNA)
      and the nature of nucleic acids synthesised from it (DNA or RNA), list
      the types of nucleic acid polymerases.
 7.   How did Hershey and Chase differentiate between DNA and protein in
      their experiment while proving that DNA is the genetic material?
 8.   Differentiate between the followings:
      (a) Repetitive DNA and Satellite DNA
      (b) mRNA and tRNA
      (c) Template strand and Coding strand
 9.   List two essential roles of ribosome during translation.
10. In the medium where E. coli was growing, lactose was added, which
    induced the lac operon. Then, why does lac operon shut down some
    time after addition of lactose in the medium?
11. Explain (in one or two lines) the function of the followings:
      (a) Promoter
      (b) tRNA
      (c) Exons
12. Why is the Human Genome project called a mega project?
13. What is DNA fingerprinting? Mention its application.
14. Briefly describe the following:
      (a)   Transcription                                                       125
      (b)   Polymorphism
      (c)   Translation
      (d)   Bioinformatics




                                                                                 2017-18
CHAPTER 10

MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE


10.1 Microbes in Household
     Products
10.2 Microbes in Industrial       Besides macroscopic plants and animals, microbes are
     Products                     the major components of biological systems on this earth.
10.3 Microbes in Sewage           You have studied about the diversity of living organisms
     Treatment                    in Class XI. Do you remember which Kingdoms among
                                  the living organisms contain micro-organisms? Which are
10.4 Microbes in Production of
     Biogas                       the ones that are only microscopic? Microbes are present
                                  everywhere – in soil, water, air, inside our bodies and that
10.5 Microbes as Biocontrol
                                  of other animals and plants. They are present even at sites
     Agents
                                  where no other life-form could possibly exist– sites such
10.6 Microbes as Biofertilisers   as deep inside the geysers (thermal vents) where the
                                  temperature may be as high as 1000C, deep in the soil,
                                  under the layers of snow several metres thick, and in highly
                                  acidic environments. Microbes are diverse– protozoa,
                                  bacteria, fungi and microscopic plant viruses, viroids and
                                  also prions that are proteinacious infectious agents. Some
                                  of the microbes are shown in Figures 10.1 and 10.2.
                                      Microbes like bacteria and many fungi can be grown
                                  on nutritive media to form colonies (Figure 10.3), that can
                                  be seen with the naked eyes. Such cultures are useful in
                                  studies on micro-organisms.
                                                                                            BIOLOGY




                                (a)




                               (b)


                                                          (a)                         (b)




                                (c)
                                                                   (c)
Figure10.1 Bacteria: (a) Rod-shaped,
magnified 1500X ; (b) Spherical                Figure 10.2      Viruses: (a) A bacteriophage; (b)
shaped, magnified1500X; (c) A rod-                              Adenovirus which causes respiratory
shaped bacterium showing flagella,                              infections; (c) Rod-shaped Tobacco
magnified 50,000X                                               Mosaic Virus (TMV). Magnified about
                                                                1,00,000–1,50,000X




180

                        (a)                                        (b)


                  Figure 10.3 (a) Colonies of bacteria growing in a petri dish;
                              (b) Fungal colony growing in a petri dish
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE


    In chapter 8, you have read that microbes cause a large number of
diseases in human beings. They also cause diseases in animals and plants.
But this should not make you think that all microbes are harmful; several
microbes are useful to man in diverse ways. Some of the most important
contributions of microbes to human welfare are discussed in this chapter.

10.1 MICROBES        IN   HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS
You would be surprised to know that we use microbes or products
derived from them everyday. A common example is the production of
curd from milk. Micro-organisms such as Lactobacillus and others
commonly called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk and convert it
to curd. During growth, the LAB produce acids that coagulate and
partially digest the milk proteins. A small amount of curd added to the
fresh milk as inoculum or starter contain millions of LAB, which at
suitable temperatures multiply, thus converting milk to curd, which
also improves its nutritional quality by increasing vitamin B12. In our
stomach too, the LAB play very beneficial role in checking disease-
causing microbes.
    The dough, which is used for making foods such as dosa and idli is
also fermented by bacteria. The puffed-up appearance of dough is due to
the production of CO2 gas. Can you tell which metabolic pathway is
taking place resulting in the formation of CO2? Where do you think the
bacteria for these fermentations came from? Similarly the dough, which
is used for making bread, is fermented using baker’s yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae). A number of traditional drinks and foods
are also made by fermentation by the microbes. ‘Toddy’, a traditional
drink of some parts of southern India is made by fermenting sap from
palms. Microbes are also used to ferment fish, soyabean and bamboo-
shoots to make foods. Cheese, is one of the oldest food items in which
microbes were used. Different varieties of cheese are known by their
characteristic texture, flavour and taste, the specificity coming from the
microbes used. For example, the large holes in ‘Swiss cheese’ are due to
production of a large amount of CO 2 by a bacterium named
Propionibacterium sharmanii. The ‘Roquefort cheese’ are ripened by
growing a specific fungi on them, which gives them a particular flavour.

10.2 MICROBES        IN   INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS                                181
Even in industry, microbes are used to synthesise a number of products
valuable to human beings. Beverages and antibiotics are some examples.
Production on an industrial scale, requires growing microbes in very large
vessels called fermentors (Figure 10.4).
                                                                                        BIOLOGY

                                               10.2.1 Fermented Beverages
                                               Microbes especially yeasts have been used from
                                               time immemorial for the production of beverages
                                               like wine, beer, whisky, brandy or rum. For this
                                               purpose the same yeast Saccharomyces
                                               cerevisiae used for bread-making and
                                               commonly called brewer’s yeast, is used for
                                               fermenting malted cereals and fruit juices, to
                                               produce ethanol. Do you recollect the metabolic
                                               reactions, which result in the production of
                                               ethanol by yeast? Depending on the type of the
                                               raw material used for fermentation and the type
          Figure 10.4 Fermentors
                                               of processing (with or without distillation)
                                               different types of alcoholic drinks are obtained.
                                               Wine and beer are produced without distillation
                                               whereas whisky, brandy and rum are produced
                                               by distillation of the fermented broth. The
                                               photograph of a fermentation plant is shown in
                                               Figure 10.5.

                                               10.2.2 Antibiotics
                                             Antibiotics produced by microbes are regarded
                                             as one of the most significant discoveries of the
                                             twentieth century and have greatly contributed
                                             towards the welfare of the human society. Anti is
                                             a Greek word that means ‘against’, and bio means
    Figure 10.5 Fermentation Plant
                                             ‘life’, together they mean ‘against life’ (in the
                    context of disease causing organisms); whereas with reference to human
                    beings, they are ‘pro life’ and not against. Antibiotics are chemical
                    substances, which are produced by some microbes and can kill or retard
                    the growth of other (disease-causing) microbes.
                        You are familiar with the commonly used antibiotic Penicillin. Do you
                    know that Penicillin was the first antibiotic to be discovered, and it was a
                    chance discovery? Alexander Fleming while working on Staphylococci
                    bacteria, once observed a mould growing in one of his unwashed culture
                    plates around which Staphylococci could not grow. He found out that it
                    was due to a chemical produced by the mould and he named it Penicillin
182                 after the mould Penicillium notatum. However, its full potential as an
                    effective antibiotic was established much later by Ernest Chain and
                    Howard Florey. This antibiotic was extensively used to treat American
                    soldiers wounded in World War II. Fleming, Chain and Florey were awarded
                    the Nobel Prize in 1945, for this discovery.
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE


    After Penicillin, other antibiotics were also purified from other
microbes. Can you name some other antibiotics and find out their
sources? Antibiotics have greatly improved our capacity to treat deadly
diseases such as plague, whooping cough (kali khansi ), diphtheria (gal
ghotu) and leprosy (kusht rog), which used to kill millions all over the
globe. Today, we cannot imagine a world without antibiotics.


10.2.3 Chemicals, Enzymes and other Bioactive Molecules
Microbes are also used for commercial and industrial production of
certain chemicals like organic acids, alcohols and enzymes. Examples of
acid producers are Aspergillus niger (a fungus) of citric acid, Acetobacter
aceti (a bacterium) of acetic acid; Clostridium butylicum (a bacterium) of
butyric acid and Lactobacillus (a bacterium) of lactic acid.
    Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is used for commercial production
of ethanol. Microbes are also used for production of enzymes. Lipases are
used in detergent formulations and are helpful in removing oily stains
from the laundry. You must have noticed that bottled fruit juices bought
from the market are clearer as compared to those made at home. This is
because the bottled juices are clarified by the use of pectinases and
proteases. Streptokinase produced by the bacterium Streptococcus and
modified by genetic engineering is used as a ‘clot buster’ for removing
clots from the blood vessels of patients who have undergone myocardial
infaction leading to heart attack.
    Another bioactive molecule, cyclosporin A, that is used as an
immunosuppressive agent in organ-transplant patients, is produced by
the fungus Trichoderma polysporum. Statins produced by the yeast
Monascus purpureus have been commercialised as blood-cholesterol
lowering agents. It acts by competitively inhibiting the enzyme responsible
for synthesis of cholesterol.


10.3 MICROBES IN SEWAGE TREATMENT
We know that large quantities of waste water are generated everyday in
cities and towns. A major component of this waste water is human excreta.
This municipal waste-water is also called sewage. It contains large
amounts of organic matter and microbes. Many of which are pathogenic.         183
Have you ever wondered where this huge quantity of sewage or urban
waste water is disposed off daily? This cannot be discharged into natural
water bodies like rivers and streams directly – you can understand why.
Before disposal, hence, sewage is treated in sewage treatment plants (STPs)
to make it less polluting. Treatment of waste water is done by the
                                                                                         BIOLOGY

                                                   heterotrophic microbes naturally present in
                                                   the sewage. This treatment is carried out in
                                                   two stages:
                                                     Primary treatment : These treatment
                                                 steps basically involve physical removal of
                                                 particles – large and small – from the sewage
                                                 through filtration and sedimentation. These
                                                 are removed in stages; initially, floating debris
                                                 is removed by sequential filtration. Then the
                                                 grit (soil and small pebbles) are removed by
                                                 sedimentation. All solids that settle form the
                                                 primary sludge, and the supernatant forms
                                                 the effluent. The effluent from the primary
      Figure 10.6 Secondary treatment
                                                 settling tank is taken for secondary treatment.
                        Secondary treatment or Biological treatment : The primary
                    effluent is passed into large aeration tanks (Figure 10.6) where it is
                    constantly agitated mechanically and air is pumped into it. This allows
                    vigorous growth of useful aerobic microbes into flocs (masses of
                    bacteria associated with fungal filaments to form mesh like
                    structures). While growing, these microbes consume the major part
                    of the organic matter in the effluent. This significantly reduces the
                    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of the effluent. BOD refers to
                    the amount of the oxygen that would be consumed if all the organic
                    matter in one liter of water were oxidised by bacteria. The sewage
                    water is treated till the BOD is reduced. The BOD test measures the
                    rate of uptake of oxygen by micro-organisms in a sample of water
                    and thus, indirectly, BOD is a measure of the organic matter present
                    in the water. The greater the BOD of waste water, more is its polluting
                    potential.
                        Once the BOD of sewage or waste water is reduced significantly, the
                    effluent is then passed into a settling tank where the bacterial ‘flocs’ are
                    allowed to sediment. This sediment is called activated sludge. A small
                    part of the activated sludge is pumped back into the aeration tank to
                    serve as the inoculum. The remaining major part of the sludge is pumped
                    into large tanks called anaerobic sludge digesters. Here, other kinds
                    of bacteria, which grow anaerobically, digest the bacteria and the fungi
184                 in the sludge. During this digestion, bacteria produce a mixture of gases
                    such as methane, hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide. These gases
                    form biogas and can be used as source of energy as it is inflammable.
                        The effluent from the secondary treatment plant is generally released
                    into natural water bodies like rivers and streams. An aerial view of such
                    a plant is shown in Figure 10.7.
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE


    You can appreciate how microbes play a major
role in treating millions of gallons of waste water
everyday across the globe. This methodology has
been practiced for more than a century now, in
almost all parts of the world. Till date, no man-
made technology has been able to rival the
microbial treatment of sewage.
    You are aware that due to increasing
urbanisation, sewage is being produced in much
larger quantities than ever before. However the
number of sewage treatment plants has not             Figure 10.7 An aerial view of a sewage plant
increased enough to treat such large quantities.
So the untreated sewage is often discharged directly into rivers leading to
their pollution and increase in water-borne diseases.
    The Ministry of Environment and Forests has initiated Ganga Action
Plan and Yamuna Action Plan to save these major rivers of our country
from pollution. Under these plans, it is proposed to build a large number
of sewage treatment plants so that only treated sewage may be discharged
in the rivers. A visit to a sewage treatment plant situated in any place
near you would be a very interesting and educating experience.

10.4 MICROBES         IN   PRODUCTION     OF   BIOGAS
Biogas is a mixture of gases (containing predominantly methane) produced
by the microbial activity and which may be used as fuel. You have learnt
that microbes produce different types of gaseous end-products during
growth and metabolism. The type of the gas produced depends upon the
microbes and the organic substrates they utilise. In the examples cited in
relation to fermentation of dough, cheese making and production of
beverages, the main gas produced was CO2.. However, certain bacteria,
which grow anaerobically on cellulosic material, produce large amount
of methane along with CO2 and H2. These bacteria are collectively called
methanogens, and one such common bacterium is Methanobacterium.
These bacteria are commonly found in the anaerobic sludge during
sewage treatment. These bacteria are also present in the rumen (a part of
stomach) of cattle. A lot of cellulosic material present in the food of cattle
is also present in the rumen. In rumen, these bacteria help in the
breakdown of cellulose and play an important role in the nutrition of
cattle. Do you think we, human beings, are able to digest the celluose                       185
present in our foods? Thus, the excreta (dung) of cattle, commonly called
gobar, is rich in these bacteria. Dung can be used for generation of biogas,
commonly called gobar gas.
    The biogas plant consists of a concrete tank (10-15 feet deep) in which
bio-wastes are collected and a slurry of dung is fed. A floating cover is
                                                                                     BIOLOGY

                                                            placed over the slurry, which
                                                            keeps on rising as the gas is
                                                            produced in the tank due to the
                                                            microbial activity. The biogas
                                                            plant has an outlet, which is
                                                            connected to a pipe to supply
                                                            biogas to nearby houses. The
                                                            spent slurry is removed through
                                                            another outlet and may be used
                                                            as fertiliser. Cattle dung is
                                                            available in large quantities in
                                                            rural areas where cattle are used
                                                            for a variety of purposes. So
                                                            biogas plants are more often
                                                            built in rural areas. The biogas
                                                            thus produced is used for
                                                            cooking and lighting. The
                                                            picture of a biogas plant is
                                                            shown in Figure 10.8. The
      Figure 10.8 A typical biogas plant                    technology of biogas production
                                                            was developed in India mainly
              due to the efforts of Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) and
              Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC). If your school is situated
              in a village or near a village, it would be very interesting to enquire if there
              are any biogas plants nearby. Visit the biogas plant and learn more about
              it from the people who are actually managing it.

               10.5 MICROBES         AS   BIOCONTROL AGENTS
               Biocontrol refers to the use of biological methods for controlling plant
               diseases and pests. In modern society, these problems have been tackled
               increasingly by the use of chemicals – by use of insecticides and pesticides.
               These chemicals are toxic and extremely harmful, to human beings and
               animals alike, and have been polluting our environment (soil, ground
               water), fruits, vegetables and crop plants. Our soil is also polluted through
               our use of weedicides to remove weeds.
                    Biological control of pests and diseases: In agriculture, there is a
               method of controlling pests that relies on natural predation rather than
186            introduced chemicals. A key belief of the organic farmer is that biodiversity
               furthers health. The more variety a landscape has, the more sustainable
               it is. The organic farmer, therefore, works to create a system where the
               insects that are sometimes called pests are not eradicated, but instead
               are kept at manageable levels by a complex system of checks and balances
               within a living and vibrant ecosystem. Contrary to the ‘conventional’
               farming practices which often use chemical methods to kill both useful
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE

and harmful life forms indiscriminately, this is a holistic approach that
seeks to develop an understanding of the webs of interaction between the
myriad of organisms that constitute the field fauna and flora. The organic
farmer holds the view that the eradication of the creatures that are often
described as pests is not only possible, but also undesirable, for without
them the beneficial predatory and parasitic insects which depend upon
them as food or hosts would not be able to survive. Thus, the use of
biocontrol measures will greatly reduce our dependence on toxic chemicals
and pesticides. An important part of the biological farming approach is
to become familiar with the various life forms that inhabit the field,
predators as well as pests, and also their life cycles, patterns of feeding
and the habitats that they prefer. This will help develop appropriate means
of biocontrol.
     The very familiar beetle with red and black markings – the Ladybird,
and Dragonflies are useful to get rid of aphids and mosquitoes,
respectively. An example of microbial biocontrol agents that can be
introduced in order to control butterfly caterpillars is the bacteria Bacillus
thuringiensis (often written as Bt ). These are available in sachets as dried
spores which are mixed with water and sprayed onto vulnerable plants
such as brassicas and fruit trees, where these are eaten by the insect
larvae. In the gut of the larvae, the toxin is released and the larvae get
killed. The bacterial disease will kill the caterpillars, but leave other insects
unharmed. Because of the development of methods of genetic engineering
in the last decade or so, the scientists have introduced B. thuringiensis
toxin genes into plants. Such plants are resistant to attack by insect pests.
Bt-cotton is one such example, which is being cultivated in some states
of our country. You will learn more about this in chapter 12.
     A biological control being developed for use in the treatment of plant
disease is the fungus Trichoderma. Trichoderma species are free-living
fungi that are very common in the root ecosystems. They are effective
biocontrol agents of several plant pathogens.
     Baculoviruses are pathogens that attack insects and other arthropods.
The majority of baculoviruses used as biological control agents are in the
genus Nucleopolyhedrovirus. These viruses are excellent candidates for
species-specific, narrow spectrum insecticidal applications. They have
been shown to have no negative impacts on plants, mammals, birds, fish
or even on non-target insects. This is especially desirable when beneficial
insects are being conserved to aid in an overall integrated pest
management (IPM) programme, or when an ecologically sensitive area is               187
being treated.

10.6 MICROBES         AS   BIOFERTILISERS
With our present day life styles environmental pollution is a major cause
of concern. The use of the chemical fertilisers to meet the ever-increasing
                                                                            BIOLOGY

      demand of agricultural produce has contributed significantly to
      this pollution. Of course, we have now realised that there are problems
      associated with the overuse of chemical fertilisers and there is a
      large pressure to switch to organic farming – the use of biofertilisers.
      Biofertilisers are organisms that enrich the nutrient quality of the soil.
      The main sources of biofertilisers are bacteria, fungi and cyanobacteria.
      You have studied about the nodules on the roots of leguminous plants
      formed by the symbiotic association of Rhizobium. These bacteria fix
      atmospheric nitrogen into organic forms, which is used by the plant as
      nutrient. Other bacteria can fix atmospheric nitrogen while free-living in
      the soil (examples Azospirillum and Azotobacter), thus enriching the
      nitrogen content of the soil.
          Fungi are also known to form symbiotic associations with plants
      (mycorrhiza). Many members of the genus Glomus form mycorrhiza.
      The fungal symbiont in these associations absorbs phosphorus from
      soil and passes it to the plant. Plants having such associations show
      other benefits also, such as resistance to root-borne pathogens, tolerance
      to salinity and drought, and an overall increase in plant growth and
      development. Can you tell what advantage the fungus derives from
      this association?
          Cyanobacteria are autotrophic microbes widely distributed in aquatic
      and terrestrial environments many of which can fix atmospheric nitrogen,
      e.g. Anabaena, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, etc. In paddy fields, cyanobacteria
      serve as an important biofertiliser. Blue green algae also add organic matter
      to the soil and increase its fertility. Currently, in our country, a number
      of biofertilisers are available commercially in the market and farmers use
      these regularly in their fields to replenish soil nutrients and to reduce
      dependence on chemical fertilisers.


                                     SUMMARY
        Microbes are a very important component of life on earth. Not all
        microbes are pathogenic. Many microbes are very useful to human
        beings. We use microbes and microbially derived products almost every
        day. Bacteria called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk to convert it
        into curd. The dough, which is used to make bread, is fermented by
        yeast called Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Certain dishes such as idli and
        dosa, are made from dough fermented by microbes. Bacteria and fungi
188     are used to impart particular texture, taste and flavor to cheese. Microbes
        are used to produce industrial products like lactic acid, acetic acid
        and alcohol, which are used in a variety of processes in the industry.
        Antibiotics like penicillins produced by useful microbes are used to kill
        disease-causing harmful microbes. Antibiotics have played a major role
        in controlling infectious diseases like diphtheria, whooping cough and
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE



  pneumonia. For more than a hundred years, microbes are being used
  to treat sewage (waste water) by the process of activated sludge formation
  and this helps in recycling of water in nature. Methanogens produce
  methane (biogas) while degrading plant waste. Biogas produced by
  microbes is used as a source of energy in rural areas. Microbes can also
  be used to kill harmful pests, a process called as biocontrol. The
  biocontrol measures help us to avoid heavy use of toxic pesticides for
  controlling pests. There is a need these days to push for use of
  biofertilisers in place of chemical fertilisers. It is clear from the diverse
  uses human beings have put microbes to that they play an important
  role in the welfare of human society.




                       EXERCISES
 1.   Bacteria cannot be seen with the naked eyes, but these can be seen
      with the help of a microscope. If you have to carry a sample from your
      home to your biology laboratory to demonstrate the presence of microbes
      under a microscope, which sample would you carry and why?
 2.   Give examples to prove that microbes release gases during metabolism.
 3.   In which food would you find lactic acid bacteria? Mention some of
      their useful applications.
 4.   Name some traditional Indian foods made of wheat, rice and Bengal
      gram (or their products) which involve use of microbes.
 5.   In which way have microbes played a major role in controlling diseases
      caused by harmful bacteria?
 6.   Name any two species of fungus, which are used in the production of
      the antibiotics.
 7.   What is sewage? In which way can sewage be harmful to us?
 8.   What is the key difference between primary and secondary sewage
      treatment?
 9.   Do you think microbes can also be used as source of energy? If yes, how?
10. Microbes can be used to decrease the use of chemical fertilisers and
    pesticides. Explain how this can be accomplished.
11. Three water samples namely river water, untreated sewage water and
    secondary effluent discharged from a sewage treatment plant were              189
    subjected to BOD test. The samples were labelled A, B and C; but the
    laboratory attendant did not note which was which. The BOD values
    of the three samples A, B and C were recorded as 20mg/L, 8mg/L and
    400mg/L, respectively. Which sample of the water is most polluted?
    Can you assign the correct label to each assuming the river water is
    relatively clean?
                                                                                BIOLOGY

      12. Find out the name of the microbes from which Cyclosporin A (an
          immunosuppressive drug) and Statins (blood cholesterol lowering
          agents) are obtained.
      13. Find out the role of microbes in the following and discuss it with your teacher.
           (a) Single cell protein (SCP)
           (b) Soil
      14. Arrange the following in the decreasing order (most important first) of
          their importance, for the welfare of human society. Give reasons for
          your answer.
           Biogas, Citric acid, Penicillin and Curd
      15. How do biofertilisers enrich the fertility of the soil?




190
CHAPTER 14

ECOSYSTEM


14.1 Ecosystem–Structure
     and Function
                             An ecosystem can be visualised as a functional unit of
14.2. Productivity           nature, where living organisms interact among themselves
                             and also with the surrounding physical environment.
14.3 Decomposition           Ecosystem varies greatly in size from a small pond to a
                             large forest or a sea. Many ecologists regard the entire
14.4 Energy Flow             biosphere as a global ecosystem, as a composite of all
                             local ecosystems on Earth. Since this system is too much
14.5 Ecological Pyramids
                             big and complex to be studied at one time, it is convenient
14.6 Ecological Succession   to divide it into two basic categories, namely the
                             terrestrial and the aquatic. Forest, grassland and desert
14.7 Nutrient Cycling        are some examples of terrestrial ecosystems; pond, lake,
                             wetland, river and estuary are some examples of aquatic
14.8 Ecosystem Services      ecosystems. Crop fields and an aquarium may also be
                             considered as man-made ecosystems.
                                 We will first look at the structure of the ecosystem, in
                             order to appreciate the input (productivity), transfer of
                             energy (food chain/web, nutrient cycling) and the output
                             (degradation and energy loss). We will also look at the
                             relationships – cycles, chains, webs – that are created as
                             a result of these energy flows within the system and their
                             inter- relationship.




                                                                                     2017-18
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      14.1 ECOSYSTEM – STRUCTURE               AND   FUNCTION
      In chapter 13, you have looked at the various components of the
      environment- abiotic and biotic. You studied how the individual biotic
      and abiotic factors affected each other and their surrounding. Let us look
      at these components in a more integrated manner and see how the flow of
      energy takes place within these components of the ecosystem.
           Interaction of biotic and abiotic components result in a physical
      structure that is characteristic for each type of ecosystem. Identification
      and enumeration of plant and animal species of an ecosystem gives its
      species composition. Vertical distribution of different species occupying
      different levels is called stratification. For example, trees occupy top
      vertical strata or layer of a forest, shrubs the second and herbs and grasses
      occupy the bottom layers.
           The components of the ecosystem are seen to function as a unit when
      you consider the following aspects:
           (i) Productivity;
          (ii) Decomposition;
         (iii) Energy flow; and
         (iv) Nutrient cycling.
           To understand the ethos of an aquatic ecosystem let us take a small
      pond as an example. This is fairly a self-sustainable unit and rather simple
      example that explain even the complex interactions that exist in an aquatic
      ecosystem. A pond is a shallow water body in which all the above
      mentioned four basic components of an ecosystem are well exhibited.
      The abiotic component is the water with all the dissolved inorganic and
      organic substances and the rich soil deposit at the bottom of the pond.
      The solar input, the cycle of temperature, day-length and other climatic
      conditions regulate the rate of function of the entire pond. The autotrophic
      components include the phytoplankton, some algae and the floating,
      submerged and marginal plants found at the edges. The consumers are
      represented by the zooplankton, the free swimming and bottom dwelling
      forms. The decomposers are the fungi, bacteria and flagellates especially
      abundant in the bottom of the pond. This system performs all the functions
      of any ecosystem and of the biosphere as a whole, i.e., conversion of
      inorganic into organic material with the help of the radiant energy of the
      sun by the autotrophs; consumption of the autotrophs by heterotrophs;
      decomposition and mineralisation of the dead matter to release them back
      for reuse by the autotrophs, these event are repeated over and over again.
242   There is unidirectional movement of energy towards the higher trophic
      levels and its dissipation and loss as heat to the environment.

      14.2. PRODUCTIVITY
      A constant input of solar energy is the basic requirement for any ecosystem
      to function and sustain. Primary production is defined as the amount of




                                                                           2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


biomass or organic matter produced per unit area over a time period by
plants during photosynthesis. It is expressed in terms of weight (g –2) or
energy (kcal m–2). The rate of biomass production is called productivity.
It is expressed in terms of gm–2 yr –1 or (kcal m –2) yr –1 to compare the
productivity of different ecosystems. It can be divided into gross primary
productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP). Gross primary
productivity of an ecosystem is the rate of production of organic matter
during photosynthesis. A considerable amount of GPP is utilised by plants
in respiration. Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R),
is the net primary productivity (NPP).
                                 GPP – R = NPP
     Net primary productivity is the available biomass for the consumption
to heterotrophs (herbiviores and decomposers). Secondary productivity
is defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by
consumers.
     Primary productivity depends on the plant species inhabiting a
particular area. It also depends on a variety of environmental factors,
availability of nutrients and photosynthetic capacity of plants. Therefore,
it varies in different types of ecosystems. The annual net primary
productivity of the whole biosphere is approximately 170 billion tons
(dry weight) of organic matter. Of this, despite occupying about 70 per
cent of the surface, the productivity of the oceans are only 55 billion tons.
Rest of course, is on land. Discuss the main reason for the low
productivity of ocean with your teacher.

14.3 DECOMPOSITION
You may have heard of the earthworm being referred to as the farmer’s
‘friend’. This is so because they help in the breakdown of complex organic
matter as well as in loosening of the soil. Similarly, decomposers break
down complex organic matter into inorganic substances like carbon
dioxide, water and nutrients and the process is called decomposition.
Dead plant remains such as leaves, bark, flowers and dead remains of
animals, including fecal matter, constitute detritus, which is the raw
material for decomposition. The important steps in the process of
decomposition are fragmentation, leaching, catabolism, humification and
mineralisation.
     Detritivores (e.g., earthworm) break down detritus into smaller particles.
This process is called fragmentation. By the process of leaching, water-
soluble inorganic nutrients go down into the soil horizon and get precipitated    243
as unavailable salts. Bacterial and fungal enzymes degrade detritus into
simpler inorganic substances. This process is called as catabolism.
     It is important to note that all the above steps in decomposition operate
simultaneously on the detritus (Figure 14.1). Humification and
mineralisation occur during decomposition in the soil. Humification leads




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                            BIOLOGY




  Figure 14.1 Diagrammatic representation of decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem

                     to accumulation of a dark coloured amorphous substance called humus
                     that is highly resistant to microbial action and undergoes decomposition
                     at an extremely slow rate. Being colloidal in nature it serves as a reservoir
                     of nutrients. The humus is further degraded by some microbes and release
                     of inorganic nutrients occur by the process known as mineralisation.
                         Decomposition is largely an oxygen-requiring process. The rate of
                     decomposition is controlled by chemical composition of detritus and
                     climatic factors. In a particular climatic condition, decomposition rate
                     is slower if detritus is rich in lignin and chitin, and quicker, if detritus is
244                  rich in nitrogen and water-soluble substances like sugars. Temperature
                     and soil moisture are the most important climatic factors that regulate
                     decomposition through their effects on the activities of soil microbes.
                     Warm and moist environment favour decomposition whereas low
                     temperature and anaerobiosis inhibit decomposition resulting in build
                     up of organic materials.




                                                                                            2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


14.4 ENERGY FLOW
Except for the deep sea hydro-thermal ecosystem, sun is the only source
of energy for all ecosystems on Earth. Of the incident solar radiation less
than 50 per cent of it is photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). We
know that plants and photosynthetic bacteria (autotrophs), fix suns’
radiant energy to make food from simple inorganic materials. Plants
capture only 2-10 per cent of the PAR and this small amount of energy
sustains the entire living world. So, it is very important to know how the
solar energy captured by plants flows through different organisms of an
ecosystem. All organisms are dependent for their food on producers, either
directly or indirectly. So you find unidirectional flow of energy from the
sun to producers and then to consumers. Is this in keeping with the first
law of thermodynamics?
     Further, ecosystems are not exempt from the Second Law of
thermodynamics. They need a constant supply of energy to synthesise
the molecules they require, to counteract the universal tendency toward
increasing disorderliness.
     The green plant in the ecosystem-terminology are called producers.
In a terrestrial ecosystem, major producers are herbaceous and woody
plants. Likewise, primary producers in an aquatic ecosystem are various
species like phytoplankton, algae and higher plants.
     You have read about the food chains and webs that exist in nature.
Starting from the plants (or producers) food chains or rather webs are
formed such that an animal feeds on a plant or on another animal and in
turn is food for another. The chain or web is formed because of this
interdependency. No energy that is trapped into an organism remains in
it for ever. The energy trapped by the producer, hence, is either passed on
to a consumer or the organism dies. Death of organism is the beginning
of the detritus food chain/web.
     All animals depend on plants (directly or indirectly) for their food needs.
They are hence called consumers and also heterotrophs. If they feed on
the producers, the plants, they are called primary consumers, and if the
animals eat other animals which in turn eat the plants (or their produce)
they are called secondary consumers. Likewise, you could have tertiary
consumers too. Obviously the primary consumers will be herbivores.
Some common herbivores are insects, birds and mammals in terrestrial
ecosystem and molluscs in aquatic ecosystem.
     The consumers that feed on these herbivores are carnivores, or more
correctly primary carnivores (though secondary consumers). Those                   245
animals that depend on the primary carnivores for food are labelled
secondary carnivores. A simple grazing food chain (GFC) is depicted
below:

    Grass                    Goat                      Man
     (Producer)             (Primary Consumer)        (Secondary consumer)




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                                  BIOLOGY


                 The detritus food chain (DFC) begins with dead organic matter. It is
             made up of decomposers which are heterotrophic organisms, mainly
             fungi and bacteria. They meet their energy and nutrient requirements by
             degrading dead organic matter or detritus. These are also known as
             saprotrophs (sapro: to decompose). Decomposers secrete digestive
             enzymes that breakdown dead and waste materials into simple, inorganic
             materials, which are subsequently absorbed by them.
                 In an aquatic ecosystem, GFC is the major conduit for energy flow.
             As against this, in a terrestrial ecosystem, a much larger fraction of energy
             flows through the detritus food chain than through the GFC. Detritus
             food chain may be connected with the grazing food chain at some levels:
             some of the organisms of DFC are prey to the GFC animals, and in a natural
             ecosystem, some animals like cockroaches, crows, etc., are omnivores.
             These natural interconnection of food chains make it a food web. How
             would you classify human beings!
                 Organisms occupy a place in the natural surroundings or in a
             community according to their feeding relationship with other organisms.
             Based on the source of their nutrition or food, organisms occupy a specific
             place in the food chain that is known as their trophic level. Producers
             belong to the first trophic level, herbivores (primary consumer) to the
             second and carnivores (secondary consumer) to the third (Figure 14.2).




246




      Figure 14.2 Diagrammatic representation of trophic levels in an ecosystem




                                                                                  2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


    The important point to note is that the amount of energy decreases at
successive trophic levels. When any organism dies it is converted to
detritus or dead biomass that serves as an energy source for decomposers.
Organisms at each trophic level depend on those at the lower trophic level
for their energy demands.
    Each trophic level has a certain mass of living material at a particular
time called as the standing crop. The standing crop is measured as the
mass of living organisms (biomass) or the number in a unit area. The
biomass of a species is expressed in terms of fresh or dry weight.
Measurement of biomass in terms of dry weight is more accurate. Why?
    The number of trophic levels in the grazing food chain is restricted as
the transfer of energy follows 10 per cent law – only 10 per cent of the
energy is transferred to each trophic level from the lower trophic level. In
nature, it is possible to have so many levels – producer, herbivore, primary
carnivore, secondary carnivore in the grazing food chain (Figure 14.3) .
Do you think there is any such limitation in a detritus food chain?




                     Figure 14.3 Energy flow through different trophic levels
                                                                                247
14.5 ECOLOGICAL PYRAMIDS
You must be familiar with the shape of a pyramid. The base of a pyramid
is broad and it narrows down at the apex. One gets a similar shape,
whether you express the food or energy relationship between organisms




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                      at different trophic level. Thus, relationship is expressed in terms of
                      number, biomass or energy. The base of each pyramid represents the
                      producers or the first trophic level while the apex represents tertiary or
                      top level consumer. The three ecological pyramids that are usually studied
                      are (a) pyramid of number; (b) pyramid of biomass and (c) pyramid of
                      energy. For detail (see Figure 14.4 a, b, c and d).




Figure 14.4 (a) Pyramid of numbers in a grassland ecosystem. Only three top-carnivores are
                supported in an ecosystem based on production of nearly 6 millions plants




Figure 14.4 (b) Pyramid of biomass shows a sharp decrease in biomass at higher trophic levels




248



Figure 14.4 (c) Inverted pyramid of biomass-small standing crop of phytoplankton supports large
                standing crop of zooplankton




                                                                                         2017-18
ECOSYSTEM




 Figure 14.4 (d) An ideal pyramid of energy. Observe that primary producers convert only 1% of
                 the energy in the sunlight available to them into NPP



    Any calculations of energy content, biomass, or numbers has to
include all organisms at that trophic level. No generalisations we make
will be true if we take only a few individuals at any trophic level into
account. Also a given organism may occupy more than one trophic level
simultaneously. One must remember that the trophic level represents a
functional level, not a species as such. A given species may occupy more
than one trophic level in the same ecosystem at the same time; for example,
a sparrow is a primary consumer when it eats seeds, fruits, peas, and a
secondary consumer when it eats insects and worms. Can you work out
how many trophic levels human beings function at in a food chain?
    In most ecosystems, all the pyramids, of number, of energy and
biomass are upright, i.e., producers are more in number and biomass
than the herbivores, and herbivores are more in number and biomass
than the carnivores. Also energy at a lower trophic level is always more
than at a higher level.
    There are exceptions to this generalisation: If you were to count the
number of insects feeding on a big tree what kind of pyramid would you
get? Now add an estimate of the number of small birds depending on the
insects, as also the number of larger birds eating the smaller. Draw the
shape you would get.
    The pyramid of biomass in sea is also generally inverted because the
biomass of fishes far exceeds that of phytoplankton. Isn’t that a paradox?
How would you explain this?
                                                                                          249
    Pyramid of energy is always upright, can never be inverted, because
when energy flows from a particular trophic level to the next trophic level,
some energy is always lost as heat at each step. Each bar in the energy
pyramid indicates the amount of energy present at each trophic level in a
given time or annually per unit area.




                                                                                            2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


          However, there are certain limitations of ecological pyramids such as
      it does not take into account the same species belonging to two or more
      trophic levels. It assumes a simple food chain, something that almost
      never exists in nature; it does not accommodate a food web. Moreover,
      saprophytes are not given any place in ecological pyramids even though
      they play a vital role in the ecosystem.

      14.6 ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSION
      You have learnt in Chapter 13, the characteristics of population and
      community and also their response to environment and how such
      responses vary from an individual response. Let us examine another aspect
      of community response to environment over time.
          An important characteristic of all communities is that their
      composition and structure constantly change in response to the changing
      environmental conditions. This change is orderly and sequential, parallel
      with the changes in the physical environment. These changes lead finally
      to a community that is in near equilibrium with the environment and
      that is called a climax community. The gradual and fairly predictable
      change in the species composition of a given area is called ecological
      succession. During succession some species colonise an area and their
      populations become more numerous, whereas populations of other species
      decline and even disappear.
          The entire sequence of communities that successively change in a
      given area are called sere(s). The individual transitional communities are
      termed seral stages or seral communities. In the successive seral stages
      there is a change in the diversity of species of organisms, increase in the
      number of species and organisms as well as an increase in the total biomass.
          The present day communities in the world have come to be because
      of succession that has occurred over millions of years since life started on
      earth. Actually succession and evolution would have been parallel
      processes at that time.
          Succession is hence a process that starts where no living organisms
      are there – these could be areas where no living organisms ever existed,
      say bare rock; or in areas that somehow, lost all the living organisms that
      existed there. The former is called primary succession, while the latter is
      termed secondary succession.
250       Examples of areas where primary succession occurs are newly cooled
      lava, bare rock, newly created pond or reservoir. The establishment of a
      new biotic community is generally slow. Before a biotic community of
      diverse organisms can become established, there must be soil. Depending
      mostly on the climate, it takes natural processes several hundred to several
      thousand years to produce fertile soil on bare rock.




                                                                          2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


    Secondary succession begins in areas where natural biotic
communities have been destroyed such as in abandoned farm lands,
burned or cut forests, lands that have been flooded. Since some soil or
sediment is present, succession is faster than primary succession.
    Description of ecological succession usually focuses on changes in
vegetation. However, these vegetational changes in turn affect food and
shelter for various types of animals. Thus, as succession proceeds, the
numbers and types of animals and decomposers also change.
    At any time during primary or secondary succession, natural or
human induced disturbances (fire, deforestation, etc.), can convert a
particular seral stage of succession to an earlier stage. Also such
disturbances create new conditions that encourage some species and
discourage or eliminate other species.

14.6.1 Succession of Plants
Based on the nature of the habitat – whether it is water (or very wet areas)
or it is on very dry areas – succession of plants is called hydrarch or
xerarch, respectively. Hydrarch succession takes place in wetter areas
and the successional series progress from hydric to the mesic conditions.
As against this, xerarch succession takes place in dry areas and the
series progress from xeric to mesic conditions. Hence, both hydrarch and
xerarch successions lead to medium water conditions (mesic) – neither
too dry (xeric) nor too wet (hydric).
    The species that invade a bare area are called pioneer species. In
primary succession on rocks these are usually lichens which are able to
secrete acids to dissolve rock, helping in weathering and soil formation.
These later pave way to some very small plants like bryophytes, which
are able to take hold in the small amount of soil. They are, with time,
succeeded by bigger plants, and after several more stages, ultimately a
stable climax forest community is formed. The climax community remains
stable as long as the environment remains unchanged. With time the
xerophytic habitat gets converted into a mesophytic one.
    In primary succession in water, the pioneers are the small
phytoplanktons, they are replaced with time by rooted-submerged plants,
rooted-floating angiosperms followed by free-floating plants, then reed-
swamp, marsh-meadow, scrub and finally the trees. The climax again would
be a forest. With time the water body is converted into land (Figure 14.5).
    In secondary succession the species that invade depend on the
                                                                               251
condition of the soil, availability of water, the environment as also the
seeds or other propagules present. Since soil is already there, the rate of
succession is much faster and hence, climax is also reached more quickly.
    What is important to understand is that succession, particularly
primary succession, is a very slow process, taking maybe thousands of




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY




                  (a)                             (d)




                  (b)                              (e)




                                                   (f)
                  (c)




252                               (g)
      Figure 14.5 Diagrammatic representation of primary succession


      years for the climax to be reached. Another important fact is to understand
      that all succession whether taking place in water or on land, proceeds to
      a similar climax community – the mesic.




                                                                         2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


14.7 NUTRIENT CYCLING
You have studied in Class XI that organisms need a constant supply of
nutrients to grow, reproduce and regulate various body functions. The
amount of nutrients, such as carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, etc.,
present in the soil at any given time, is referred to as the standing state. It
varies in different kinds of ecosystems and also on a seasonal basis.
    What is important is to appreciate that nutrients which are never lost
from the ecosystems, are recycled time and again indefinitely. The
movement of nutrient elements through the various components of an
ecosystem is called nutrient cycling. Another name of nutrient cycling
is biogeochemical cycles (bio: living organism, geo: rocks, air, water).
Nutrient cycles are of two types: (a) gaseous and (b) sedimentary. The




                     Figure 14.6 Simplified model of carbon cycle in the biosphere   253
reservoir for gaseous type of nutrient cycle (e.g., nitrogen, carbon cycle)
exists in the atmosphere and for the sedimentary cycle (e.g., sulphur and
phosphorus cycle), the reservoir is located in Earth’s crust. Environmental
factors, e.g., soil, moisture, pH, temperature, etc., regulate the rate of
release of nutrients into the atmosphere. The function of the reservoir is




                                                                                     2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


      to meet with the deficit which occurs due to imbalance in the rate of influx
      and efflux.
          You have made a detailed study of nitrogen cycle in class XI. Here we
      discuss carbon and phosphorus cycles.

      14.7.1 Ecosystem – Carbon Cycle
      When you study the composition of living organisms, carbon constitutes
      49 per cent of dry weight of organisms and is next only to water. If we
      look at the total quantity of global carbon, we find that 71 per cent carbon
      is found dissolved in oceans. This oceanic reservoir regulates the amount
      of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (Figure 14.6). Do you know that the
      atmosphere only contains about 1per cent of total global carbon?
           Fossil fuel also represent a reservoir of carbon. Carbon cycling occurs
      through atmosphere, ocean and through living and dead organisms.
      According to one estimate 4 × 1013 kg of carbon is fixed in the biosphere
      through photosynthesis annually. A considerable amount of carbon
      returns to the atmosphere as CO2 through respiratory activities of the
      producers and consumers. Decomposers also contribute substantially
      to CO2 pool by their processing of waste materials and dead organic matter
      of land or oceans. Some amount of the fixed carbon is lost to sediments
      and removed from circulation. Burning of wood, forest fire and combustion
      of organic matter, fossil fuel, volcanic activity are additional sources for
      releasing CO2 in the atmosphere.
           Human activities have significantly influenced the carbon cycle. Rapid
      deforestation and massive burning of fossil fuel for energy and transport
      have significantly increased the rate of release of carbon dioxide into the
      atmosphere (see greenhouse effect in Chapter 16).

      14.7.2 Ecosystem – Phosphorus Cycle
      Phosphorus is a major constituent of biological membranes, nucleic acids
      and cellular energy transfer systems. Many animals also need large
      quantities of this element to make shells, bones and teeth. The natural
      reservoir of phosphorus is rock, which contains phosphorus in the form
      of phosphates. When rocks are weathered, minute amounts of these
      phosphates dissolve in soil solution and are absorbed by the roots of the
      plants (Figure 14.7). Herbivores and other animals obtain this element
      from plants. The waste products and the dead organisms are decomposed
254   by phosphate-solubilising bacteria releasing phosphorus. Unlike carbon
      cycle, there is no respiratory release of phosphorus into atmosphere. Can
      you differentiate between the carbon and the phosphorus cycle?
          The other two major and important differences between carbon and
      phosphorus cycle are firstly, atmospheric inputs of phosphorus through
      rainfall are much smaller than carbon inputs, and, secondly, gaseous




                                                                          2017-18
ECOSYSTEM




 Figure 14.7 A simplified model of phosphorus cycling in a terrestrial
             ecosystem


exchanges of phosphorus between organism and environment are
negligible.

14.8 ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
Healthy ecosystems are the base for a wide range of economic,
environmental and aesthetic goods and services. The products of
ecosystem processes are named as ecosystem services, for example,
healthy forest ecosystems purify air and water, mitigate droughts and
floods, cycle nutrients, generate fertile soils, provide wildlife habitat,
maintain biodiversity, pollinate crops, provide storage site for carbon
and also provide aesthetic, cultural and spiritual values. Though value
of such services of biodiversity is difficult to determine, it seems
reasonable to think that biodiversity should carry a hefty price tag.
    Robert Constanza and his colleagues have very recently tried to
put price tags on nature’s life-support services. Researchers have put
an average price tag of US $ 33 trillion a year on these fundamental
ecosystems services, which are largely taken for granted because they
are free. This is nearly twice the value of the global gross national        255
product GNP which is (US $ 18 trillion).
    Out of the total cost of various ecosystem services, the soil
formation accounts for about 50 per cent, and contributions of other
services like recreation and nutrient cycling, are less than 10 per
cent each. The cost of climate regulation and habitat for wildlife are
about 6 per cent each.




                                                                             2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY




                                  SUMMARY
      An ecosystem is a functional unit of nature and comprises abiotic and
      biotic components. Abiotic components are inorganic materials- air,
      water and soil, whereas biotic components are producers, consumers
      and decomposers. Each ecosystem has characteristic physical structure
      resulting from interaction amongst abiotic and biotic components.
      Species composition and stratification are the two main structural
      features of an ecosystem. Based on source of nutrition every organism
      occupies a place in an ecosystem.
          Productivity, decomposition, energy flow, and nutrient cycling are
      the four important components of an ecosystem. Primary productivity
      is the rate of capture of solar energy or biomass production of the
      producers. It is divided into two types: gross primary productivity (GPP)
      and net primary productivity (NPP). Rate of capture of solar energy or
      total production of organic matter is called as GPP. NPP is the remaining
      biomass or the energy left after utilisation of producers. Secondary
      productivity is the rate of assimilation of food energy by the consumers.
      In decomposition, complex organic compounds of detritus are converted
      to carbon dioxide, water and inorganic nutrients by the decomposers.
      Decomposition involves three processes, namely fragmentation of
      detritus, leaching and catabolism.
          Energy flow is unidirectional. First, plants capture solar energy
      and then, food is transferred from the producers to decomposers.
      Organisms of different trophic levels in nature are connected to each
      other for food or energy relationship forming a food chain. The storage
      and movement of nutrient elements through the various components
      of the ecosystem is called nutrient cycling; nutrients are repeatedly
      used through this process. Nutrient cycling is of two types—gaseous
      and sedimentary. Atmosphere or hydrosphere is the reservoir for the
      gaseous type of cycle (carbon), whereas Earth’s crust is the reservoir
      for sedimentary type (phosphorus). Products of ecosystem processes
      are named as ecosystem services, e.g., purification of air and water by
      forests.
          The biotic community is dynamic and undergoes changes with the
      passage of time. These changes are sequentially ordered and constitute
      ecological succession. Succession begins with invasion of a bare lifeless
      area by pioneers which later pave way for successors and ultimately a
      stable climax community is formed. The climax community remains
      stable as long as the environment remains unchanged.




                           EXERCISES
256
      1.   Fill in the blanks.
           (a) Plants are called as_________because they fix carbon dioxide.
           (b) In an ecosystem dominated by trees, the pyramid (of numbers)
                is_________type.
           (c) In aquatic ecosystems, the limiting factor for the productivity
                is_________.




                                                                           2017-18
ECOSYSTEM


      (d) Common detritivores in our ecosystem are_________.
      (e) The major reservoir of carbon on earth is_________.
 2.   Which one of the following has the largest population in a food chain?
      (a) Producers
      (b) Primary consumers
      (c) Secondary consumers
      (d) Decomposers
 3.   The second trophic level in a lake is
      (a) Phytoplankton
      (b) Zooplankton
      (c) Benthos
      (d) Fishes
 4.   Secondary producers are
      (a) Herbivores
      (b) Producers
      (c) Carnivores
      (d) None of the above
 5.   What is the percentage of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) in
      the incident solar radiation?
      (a) 100%
      (b) 50 %
      (c) 1-5%
      (d) 2-10%
 6.   Distinguish between
      (a) Grazing food chain and detritus food chain
      (b) Production and decomposition
      (c) Upright and inverted pyramid
      (d) Food chain and Food web
      (e) Litter and detritus
      (f) Primary and secondary productivity
 7.   Describe the components of an ecosystem.
 8.   Define ecological pyramids and describe with examples, pyramids of
      number and biomass.
 9.   What is primary productivity? Give brief description of factors that affect
      primary productivity.
10.   Define decomposition and describe the processes and products of
      decomposition.
11. Give an account of energy flow in an ecosystem.                                 257
12. Write important features of a sedimentary cycle in an ecosystem.
13. Outline salient features of carbon cycling in an ecosystem.




                                                                                    2017-18
BIOLOGY
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII
                                                                                  ISBN 81-7450-639-X
First Edition
December 2006 Pausa 1928                                                   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted                                         q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
                                                     or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
November 2007 Kartika 1929                           photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
January 2009 Pausa 1930                              publisher.
December 2009 Pausa 1931                          q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
                                                     be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
January 2011 Magha 1932                              consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
January 2012 Magha 1933                              published.
November 2012 Kartika 1934                        q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
                                                     revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other
November 2013 Kartika 1935                           means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
December 2014 Pausa 1936
January 2015 Pausa 1937
January 2017 Pausa 1938                                OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
                                                       DIVISION, NCERT

PD 260T HK                                              NCERT Campus
                                                        Sri Aurobindo Marg
                                                        New Delhi 110 016                        Phone : 011-26562708
© National Council of Educational
                                                        108, 100 Feet Road
Research and Training, 2006                             Hosdakere Halli Extension
                                                        Banashankari III Stage
                                                        Bengaluru 560 085                       Phone : 080-26725740

                                                        Navjivan Trust Building
                                                        P.O.Navjivan
                                                        Ahmedabad 380 014                        Phone : 079-27541446

                                                        CWC Campus
                                                        Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
                                                        Panihati
                                                        Kolkata 700 114                          Phone : 033-25530454

                                                        CWC Complex
                                                        Maligaon
                                                        Guwahati 781 021                         Phone : 0361-2674869




` 170.00
                                               Publication Team
                                               Head, Publication                       : M. Siraj Anwar
                                               Division

                                               Chief Editor                            : Shveta Uppal

                                               Chief Business                          : Gautam Ganguly
                                               Manager

                                               Chief Production                        : Arun Chitkara
                                               Officer (Incharge)

                                               Assistant Editor                        : Shashi Chadha
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark                                      Production Assistant                    : Sunil Kumar
Published at the Publication Division by the                           Cover and Layout
Secretary, National Council of Educational
                                                                             Shweta Rao
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Supreme
                                                                           Illustrations
Offset Press, 133, Udyog Kendra-I, Greater
Noida                                                                        Lalit Maurya
                              FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s life at school
must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the
legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of
education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
     The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will
take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities
and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate
new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body
of knowledge.
     These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The
methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of
stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden
by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
    The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the
hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We
wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,
Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor K. Muralidhar,
Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook. We are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel.
We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed




                                               III
by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande,
for their valuable time and contribution.
     As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinement.



                                                                                 Director
New Delhi                                                National Council of Educational
20 November 2006                                                  Research and Training




                                             IV
                                    PREFACE
Biology is the study of life in its entirety. The growth of biology as a natural science during
the last 1000 years is interesting from many points of view. One feature of this growth is
changing emphasis. Initially it was description of life forms. Identification, nomenclature,
classification of all recorded living forms enjoyed the attention of scientists for a long time.
Description of their habitats and (in the case of animals) their behaviour was included in
this study. In later years, the focus was physiology and internal morphology or anatomy.
Darwinian ideas of evolution by natural selection changed the perception completely. Classical
descriptive and clueless biology found a theoretical framework in the evolutionary theory of
Darwin.
      In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Physics and Chemistry were applied to Biology
and the new science of Biochemistry soon became the dominant face of biology. On one hand
Biochemistry was integrating with Physiology, becoming almost synonymous with it. On the
other hand it gave rise to Structural Biology (structure of biomacromolecules), originally called
Molecular Biology. The work of Bernal, Pauling, Watson and Crick, Hodgkins, Perutz and Kendrew,
Delbruck, Luria, Monod, Beadle and Tatum, Lederberg, Brenner, Benzer, Nirenberg, Khorana,
Mclintock, Sanger, Cohen, Boyer, Kornbergs (father and son), Leder, Chambon and scores of
others brought in and established a modern version of Molecular Biology dealing with life
processes at molecular level.
      Physics and Chemistry dominated public perception of science for a long time.
Daytoday life of man was influenced by developments in Physics, Chemistry and their respective
manufacturing industries. Slowly and steadily, Biology, not to be left behind, demonstrated
its utility for human welfare. Medical practice, especially diagnostics, green revolution and
the newly emerging biotechnology and its success stories made the presence of biology felt
by the common man. Patent laws brought biology into political domain and commercial value
of biology became obvious.
      For more than a century, classical and so-called reductionist biology fought artifical
battles. The fact is both are important. Ecology brought in synthesis of both approaches
and emphasised integrated understanding of biology. Form and process are both equally
important. Systems biology, using mathematical tools, is bringing about a modern synthesis
of both the aspects of Biology.
      The Class XI and XII textbooks in biology essentially were to reflect these threads of
biological thought. While the Class XI book dealt with morphology, taxonomy, molecular and
cellular aspects of physiology, the Class XII book deals with the physiological process of
reproduction in flowering plants and humans, the principles of inheritance, the nature of
genetic material and its function, the contributions of biology to human welfare, basic
principles of biotechnological processes and their applications and achievements. The
Class XII book also relates genes to evolution on one hand and presents ecological interactions,
behaviour of populations and ecosystems on the other. Most important, the guidelines under
NCF-2005 have been followed in letter and spirit. The total learning load has been reduced


                                               V
considerably and themes like environmental issues, adolescent problems and reproductive
health have been dealt with in some detail. Studied together, the class XI and class XII
textbooks in Biology would enable the student to —
         (i) become familiar with the diversity of biological material.
        (ii) appreciate and believe in the Darwinian evolutionary process exhibited by the living
             world.
       (iii) understand the dynamic state of constituents of living bodies, i.e., metabolic
             basis of all physiological processes in plants, animals and microbes.
       (iv) realise the structure and function of genetic material in directing the inherited
             phenotype pattern as well as a mediator of evolutionary process.
        (v) appreciate the profound contributions of biology to human welfare.
       (vi) reflect on the physico-chemical basis of living processes and at the same time
             realise the limitation of reductionism in understanding behaviour of organisms.
      (vii) experience the humbling effect of this realisation that all living organisms are
             related to each other by virtue of shared genetic material.
     (viii) realise that biology is the story of the struggle of living organisms for existence
             and survival.
    One may notice a perceptible change in the writing style. Most of the chapters are written
in an easy dialogue style engaging the student constantly while some chapters are in the
form of critical comments on the subject matter. A number of questions have been provided
at the end of each chapter though answers to some may not be found in the text. Students
have to read supplementary material, upon advise from the teacher, to answer such questions.
    I am thankful to Professor Krishna Kumar, Director NCERT; Professor G. Ravindra, Joint
Director, NCERT and Professor Hukum Singh, Head, DESM, NCERT for constant support. I
must place on record my deep appreciation for Dr B.K. Tripathi, Reader, DESM, NCERT for
his relentless efforts as coordinator in bringing out the Biology textbook for both the
Class XI and XII. All the members of the development team, the experts and reviewers, and
the school teachers have contributed enormously in the preparation of this book. I thank
them all. I am indeed highly thankful to the members of monitoring committee constituted
by Ministry of Human Resource Development for their valuable observation that helped in
the improvement of the book at the final stage. The book is prepared keeping in mind the
guidelines of the NCF-2005 especially the emphasis on reducing the learning load. We hope that
the book would meet the expectations of all the stakeholders. All suggestions for further
improvement are always welcome.

                                                                                 K. MURALIDHAR
Department of Zoology                                                            Chief Advisor
University of Delhi                                              Biology Textbook for Class XII




                                               VI
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP          FOR   TEXTBOOKS    IN   SCIENCE   AND   MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA),
Pune University, Pune

CHIEF ADVISOR
K. Muralidhar, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi

MEMBERS
Ajit Kumar Kavathekar, Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
B.B.P. Gupta, Professor, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong
B.N. Pandey, Principal, Ordinance Factory Higher Secondary School, Dehradun
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
J.P. Gaur, Professor, Department of Botany, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
J.S. Virdi, Reader, Department of Microbiology, University of Delhi, South Campus, New Delhi
K. Sarath Chandran, Reader (Zoology), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
L.C. Rai, Professor, Department of Botany, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
M.M. Chaturvedi, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
N.V.S.R.K. Prasad, Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Sangeeta Sharma, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, New Delhi
Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Shanti Chandrashekaran, Principal Scientist, Division of Genetics, I.A.R.I., New Delhi
Shardendu, Reader, Department of Botany, Science College, Patna University, Patna
Simminder K. Thukral, Assistant Professor, NIIT Institute of Information Technology, New Delhi
Sunaina Sharma, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Dwarka, New Delhi
T.R. Rao, Professor (Retd.) School of Enviornmental Studies, University of Delhi, Delhi
V.K. Kakaria, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
V.V. Anand, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore

MEMBER-COORDINATOR
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi




                                                VII
             ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully acknowledges
the valuable contribution of K.R. Shivanna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Botany,
University of Delhi, Delhi; S.K. Saidapur, Professor, Department of Zoology, Karnataka
University Dharwad; Vani Brahmachari, Professor, Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical
Research, University of Delhi, Delhi; A.N. Lahiri Majumdar, Professor, Bose Institute, Kolkata;
Anil Tripathi, Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi;
J.L. Jain, Senior Physician, WUS Health Centre, University of Delhi, Delhi, in the development
of the Biology textbook for Class XII. NCERT is also grateful to K.R. Shivanna and
T.Subramanyam, IIT, Kanpur for some of the photographs used in the book.
    NCERT sincerely acknowledges the contributions of the members who participated in the
review of the manuscripts – A.S. Dixit, Reader, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill
University, Shillong; S.L. Varte, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi; Sushma Jairath, Reader, Department of Women’s Education, NCERT,
New Delhi; Mona Yadav, Lecturer, Department of Women’s Education, NCERT, New Delhi;
Poonam A. Kant, Reader (Zoology), Acharya Narendra Dev College, New Delhi; Mrs. Suvarna
Fonseca è Antao, Gr. I Teacher (Biology), Carmel Higher Secondary School, Nuvem, Goa;
Rashmi Mishra, PGT (Biology), Carmel Convent Senior Secondary School, BHEL, Bhopal;
Ishwant Kaur, PGT (Biology), D.M. School, RIE, Bhopal; A.K. Singh, PGT (Biology), Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Cantt, Varanasi; R.P. Singh, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikash Vidyalaya,
Kishan ganj, Delhi; M.K. Tiwari, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Mandsaur, Madhya Pradesh;
A.K. Ganguly, PGT (Biology), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Roshnabad, Haridwar; Chaitali
Dixit, PGT (Biology), St. Anthony’s Higher Secondary School (Don Bosco), Shillong and Abhishek
Chari, Acharya Narendra Dev College, New Delhi.
    The Council is highly thankful to Hukum Singh, Professor and Head, Department of
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT for his valuable support throughout the
making of this book.
    The contributions of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station; Seema Mehmi and
Arvind Sharma, DTP operators; Deepti Sharma, Copy Editor; Rachna Dogra and Abhimanu
Mohanty, Proof Readers and APC office and administrative staff of Department of Education
in Science and Mathematics, NCERT also acknowledged.
    The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT, in bringing out this publication are
highly appreciated.




                                             VIII
                             CONTENTS
FOREWORD                                                                       iii
PREFACE                                                                        vii

UNIT VI
REPRODUCTION                                                                 1-66
Chapter 1       : Reproduction in Organisms                                     3
                  (Please see Supplementary Material on page no. 287)

Chapter 2       : Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants                      19
Chapter 3       : Human Reproduction                                           42
Chapter 4       : Reproductive Health                                          57


UNIT VII
GENETICS    AND   EVOLUTION                                              67-142
Chapter 5       : Principles of Inheritance and Variation                      6     9
                  (Please see Supplementary Material on page nos. 287-289)

Chapter 6       : Molecular Basis of Inheritance                               95
Chapter 7       : Evolution                                                   1 2 6
                  (Please see Supplementary Material on page no. 289)


UNIT VIII
BIOLOGY   IN   HUMAN WELFARE                                            143-190
Chapter 8       : Human Health and Disease                                    145
Chapter 9       : Strategies for Enhancement in                               165
                  Food Production
Chapter 10      : Microbes in Human Welfare                                   179




                                            IX
UNIT IX
BIOTECHNOLOGY                                                      191-216
Chapter 11 : Biotechnology : Principles and Processes                  193
Chapter 12 : Biotechnology and its Applications                        207


UNIT X
ECOLOGY                                                            217-286

Chapter 13 : Organisms and Populations                                 219
             (Please see Supplementary Material on page no. 290)

Chapter 14 : Ecosystem                                                 241
Chapter 15 : Biodiversity and Conservation                             258
             (Please see Supplementary Material on page no. 290)

Chapter 16 : Environmental Issues                                      270

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL                                             287–290




                                   X
CHAPTER 3

HUMAN REPRODUCTION


 3.1   The Male Reproductive
       System
 3.2   The Female Reproductive     As you are aware, humans are sexually reproducing and
       System                      viviparous. The reproductive events in humans include
                                   formation of gametes (gametogenesis), i.e., sperms in males
 3.3   Gametogenesis               and ovum in females, transfer of sperms into the female
 3.4   Menstrual Cycle             genital tract (insemination) and fusion of male and female
                                   gametes (fertilisation) leading to formation of zygote. This
 3.5   Fertilisation and
                                   is followed by formation and development of blastocyst
       Implantation
                                   and its attachment to the uterine wall (implantation),
 3.6   Pregnancy and               embryonic development (gestation) and delivery of the
       Embryonic Development       baby (parturition). You have learnt that these reproductive
                                   events occur after puberty. There are remarkable
 3.7   Parturition and Lactation
                                   differences between the reproductive events in the male
                                   and in the female, for example, sperm formation continues
                                   even in old men, but formation of ovum ceases in women
                                   around the age of fifty years. Let us examine the male and
                                   female reproductive systems in human.

                                   3.1 THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
                                   The male reproductive system is located in the pelvis region
                                   (Figure 3.1a). It includes a pair of testes alongwith
                                   accessory ducts, glands and the external genitalia.
HUMAN REPRODUCTION


     The testes are situated outside the
abdominal cavity within a pouch
called scrotum. The scrotum helps
in maintaining the low temperature
of the testes (2–2.5o C lower than
the normal internal body
temperature) necessary for
spermatogenesis. In adults, each
testis is oval in shape, with a length
of about 4 to 5 cm and a width of
about 2 to 3 cm. The testis is
covered by a dense covering. Each
testis has about 250 compartments
called      testicular        lobules Figure 3.1(a) Diagrammatic sectional view of male pelvis
(Figure 3.1b).                                            showing reproductive system
     Each lobule contains one to
three highly coiled seminiferous
tubules in which sperms are
produced. Each seminiferous tubule
is lined on its inside by two types
of cells called male germ cells
(spermatogonia) and Sertoli cells
(Figure 3.2 ). The male germ cells
undergo meiotic divisions finally
leading to sperm formation, while
Sertoli cells provide nutrition to the
germ cells. The regions outside the
seminiferous tubules called
interstitial spaces, contain small
blood vessels and interstitial cells
or Leydig cells (Figure 3.2). Leydig
cells synthesise and secrete
testicular hormones called Figure 3.1(b) Diagrammatic view of male reproductive system
                                                        (part of testis is open to show inner details)
androgens. Other immunologically
competent cells are also present.
     The male sex accessory ducts include rete testis, vasa efferentia,
epididymis and vas deferens (Figure 3.1b). The seminiferous tubules of
the testis open into the vasa efferentia through rete testis. The vasa efferentia
leave the testis and open into epididymis located along the posterior surface
                                                                                                       43
of each testis. The epididymis leads to vas deferens that ascends to the
abdomen and loops over the urinary bladder. It receives a duct from seminal
vesicle and opens into urethra as the ejaculatory duct (Figure 3.1a). These
ducts store and transport the sperms from the testis to the outside through
urethra. The urethra originates from the urinary bladder and extends
through the penis to its external opening called urethral meatus.
                                                                             BIOLOGY




            Figure 3.2 Diagrammatic sectional view of seminiferous tubule

         The penis is the male external genitalia (Figure 3.1a, b). It is made up
     of special tissue that helps in erection of the penis to facilitate insemination.
     The enlarged end of penis called the glans penis is covered by a loose fold
     of skin called foreskin.
         The male accessory glands (Figure 3.1a, b) include paired seminal
     vesicles, a prostate and paired bulbourethral glands. Secretions of these
     glands constitute the seminal plasma which is rich in fructose, calcium
     and certain enzymes. The secretions of bulbourethral glands also helps
     in the lubrication of the penis.

     3.2 THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
     The female reproductive system consists of a pair of ovaries alongwith a pair
     of oviducts, uterus, cervix, vagina and the external genitalia located in
     pelvic region (Figure 3.3a). These parts of the system alongwith a pair of the
     mammary glands are integrated structurally and functionally to support
     the processes of ovulation, fertilisation, pregnancy, birth and child care.
         Ovaries are the primary female sex organs that produce the female
44   gamete (ovum) and several steroid hormones (ovarian hormones).
     The ovaries are located one on each side of the lower abdomen
     (Figure 3.3b). Each ovary is about 2 to 4 cm in length and is connected to
     the pelvic wall and uterus by ligaments. Each ovary is covered by a thin
     epithelium which encloses the ovarian stroma. The stroma is divided into
     two zones – a peripheral cortex and an inner medulla.
HUMAN REPRODUCTION




  Figure 3.3 (a) Diagrammatic sectional view of female pelvis showing
                 reproductive system


    The oviducts (fallopian tubes), uterus and vagina constitute the female
accessory ducts. Each fallopian tube is about 10-12 cm long and extends
from the periphery of each ovary to the uterus (Figure 3.3b), the part closer
to the ovary is the funnel-shaped infundibulum. The edges of the
infundibulum possess finger-like projections called fimbriae, which help in
collection of the ovum after ovulation. The infundibulum leads to a wider




                                                                                45



Figure 3.3 (b) Diagrammatic sectional view of the female reproductive system
                                                                                BIOLOGY


        part of the oviduct called ampulla. The last part of the oviduct, isthmus has
        a narrow lumen and it joins the uterus.
             The uterus is single and it is also called womb. The shape of the uterus
        is like an inverted pear. It is supported by ligaments attached to the pelvic
        wall. The uterus opens into vagina through a narrow cervix. The cavity of
        the cervix is called cervical canal (Figure 3.3b) which alongwith vagina
        forms the birth canal. The wall of the uterus has three layers of tissue. The
        external thin membranous perimetrium, middle thick layer of smooth
        muscle, myometrium and inner glandular layer called endometrium that
        lines the uterine cavity. The endometrium undergoes cyclical changes during
        menstrual cycle while the myometrium exhibits strong contraction during
        delivery of the baby.
             The female external genitalia include mons pubis, labia majora, labia
        minora, hymen and clitoris (Figure 3.3a). Mons pubis is a cushion of fatty
        tissue covered by skin and pubic hair. The labia majora are fleshy folds of
        tissue, which extend down from the mons pubis and surround the vaginal
        opening. The labia minora are paired folds of tissue under the labia majora.
        The opening of the vagina is often covered partially by a membrane called
        hymen. The clitoris is a tiny finger-like structure which lies at the upper
        junction of the two labia minora above the urethral opening. The hymen is
        often torn during the first coitus (intercourse). However, it can also be broken
        by a sudden fall or jolt, insertion of a vaginal tampon, active participation
        in some sports like horseback riding, cycling, etc. In some women the hymen
        persists even after coitus. In fact, the presence or absence of hymen is not
        a reliable indicator of virginity or sexual experience.




46




     Figure 3.4 A diagrammatic sectional view of Mammary gland
HUMAN REPRODUCTION


    A functional mammary gland is characteristic of all female mammals.
The mammary glands are paired structures (breasts) that contain
glandular tissue and variable amount of fat. The glandular tissue of each
breast is divided into 15-20 mammary lobes containing clusters of cells
called alveoli (Figure 3.4). The cells of alveoli secrete milk, which is stored
in the cavities (lumens) of alveoli. The alveoli open into mammary tubules.
The tubules of each lobe join to form a mammary duct. Several mammary
ducts join to form a wider mammary ampulla which is connected to
lactiferous duct through which milk is sucked out.

3.3 GAMETOGENESIS
The primary sex organs – the testis in the males and the ovaries in the
females – produce gametes, i.e, sperms and ovum, respectively, by the
process called gametogenesis. In testis, the immature male germ cells
(spermatogonia) produce sperms by spermatogenesis that begins at
puberty. The spermatogonia (sing. spermatogonium) present on the
inside wall of seminiferous tubules multiply by mitotic division and
increase in numbers. Each spermatogonium is diploid and contains 46
chromosomes. Some of the spermatogonia called primary
spermatocytes periodically undergo meiosis. A primary spermatocyte
completes the first meiotic division (reduction division) leading to
formation of two equal, haploid cells called
secondary spermatocytes, which have only
23 chromosomes each. The secondary
spermatocytes undergo the second meiotic
division to produce four equal, haploid
spermatids (Figure 3.5). What would be the
number of chromosome in the spermatids?
The spermatids are transformed into
spermatozoa (sperms) by the process called
spermiogenesis. After spermiogenesis,
sperm heads become embedded in the
Sertoli cells, and are finally released from
the seminiferous tubules by the process
called spermiation.
    Spermatogenesis starts at the age of
                                                Figure 3.5 Diagrammatic sectional view of a
puberty due to significant increase in the                  seminiferous tubule (enlarged)
secretion of gonadotropin releasing hormone
(GnRH). This, if you recall, is a hypothalamic hormone. The increased                      47
levels of GnRH then acts at the anterior pituitary gland and stimulates
secretion of two gonadotropins – luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH). LH acts at the Leydig cells and stimulates
synthesis and secretion of androgens. Androgens, in turn, stimulate the
process of spermatogenesis. FSH acts on the Sertoli cells and stimulates
                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                                               secretion of some factors which help in the
                                               process of spermiogenesis.
                                                    Let us examine the structure of a sperm. It
                                               is a microscopic structure composed of a head,
                                               neck, a middle piece and a tail (Figure 3.6). A
                                               plasma membrane envelops the whole body of
                                               sperm. The sperm head contains an elongated
                                               haploid nucleus, the anterior portion of which
                                               is covered by a cap-like structure, acrosome.
                                               The acrosome is filled with enzymes that help
                                               fertilisation of the ovum. The middle piece
                                               possesses numerous mitochondria, which
                                               produce energy for the movement of tail that
                                               facilitate sperm motility essential for fertilisation.
                                               The human male ejaculates about 200 to 300
                                               million sperms during a coitus of which, for
                                               normal fertility, at least 60 per cent sperms
                                               must have normal shape and size and at least
                                               40 per cent of them must show vigorous
                                               motility.
     Figure 3.6 Structure of a sperm
                                                    Sperms released from the seminiferous
                                               tubules, are transported by the accessory
                   ducts. Secretions of epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicle and
                   prostate are essential for maturation and motility of sperms. The seminal
                   plasma along with the sperms constitute the semen. The functions of
                   male sex accessory ducts and glands are maintained by the testicular
                   hormones (androgens).
                        The process of formation of a mature female gamete is called oogenesis
                   which is markedly different from spermatogenesis. Oogenesis is initiated
                   during the embryonic development stage when a couple of million gamete
                   mother cells (oogonia) are formed within each fetal ovary; no more oogonia
                   are formed and added after birth. These cells start division and enter into
                   prophase-I of the meiotic division and get temporarily arrested at that stage,
                   called primary oocytes. Each primary oocyte then gets surrounded by a
                   layer of granulosa cells and is called the primary follicle (Figure 3.7). A
                   large number of these follicles degenerate during the phase from birth to
                   puberty. Therefore, at puberty only 60,000-80,000 primary follicles are
                   left in each ovary. The primary follicles get surrounded by more layers of
                   granulosa cells and a new theca and are called secondary follicles.
                        The secondary follicle soon transforms into a tertiary follicle which is
48                 characterised by a fluid filled cavity called antrum. The theca layer is
                   organised into an inner theca interna and an outer theca externa. It is
                   important to draw your attention that it is at this stage that the primary
                   oocyte within the tertiary follicle grows in size and completes its first meiotic
                   division. It is an unequal division resulting in the formation of a large
                   haploid secondary oocyte and a tiny first polar body (Figure 3.8b). The
HUMAN REPRODUCTION


secondary oocyte retains bulk of the
nutrient rich cytoplasm of the primary
oocyte. Can you think of any advantage
for this? Does the first polar body born
out of first meiotic division divide further
or degenerate? At present we are not
very certain about this. The tertiary
follicle further changes into the mature
follicle or Graafian follicle (Figure 3.7).
The secondary oocyte forms a new
membrane called zona pellucida
surrounding it. The Graafian follicle now
ruptures to release the secondary oocyte
(ovum) from the ovary by the
process called ovulation. Can you            Figure 3.7 Diagrammatic Section view of ovary
identify major differences between
spermatogenesis and oogenesis? A diagrammatic representation of
spermatogenesis and oogenesis is given below (Figure 3.8).




                     (a)                                              (b)
  Figure 3.8 Schematic representation of (a) Spermatogenesis; (b) Oogenesis


3.4 MENSTRUAL CYCLE
                                                                                        49
The reproductive cycle in the female primates (e.g. monkeys, apes and
human beings) is called menstrual cycle. The first menstruation begins
at puberty and is called menarche. In human females, menstruation
is repeated at an average interval of about 28/29 days, and the cycle of
events starting from one menstruation till the next one is called the
menstrual cycle. One ovum is released (ovulation) during the middle
                                                                                       BIOLOGY




     Figure 3.9 Diagrammatic presentation of various events during a menstrual cycle

                    of each menstrual cycle. The major events of the menstrual cycle are
                    shown in Figure 3.9. The cycle starts with the menstrual phase, when
                    menstrual flow occurs and it lasts for 3-5 days. The menstrual flow
                    results due to breakdown of endometrial lining of the uterus and its
                    blood vessels which forms liquid that comes out through vagina.
                    Menstruation only occurs if the released ovum is not fertilised. Lack of
                    menstruation may be indicative of pregnancy. However, it may also be
                    caused due to some other underlying causes like stress, poor health etc.
50                  The menstrual phase is followed by the follicular phase. During
                    this phase, the primary follicles in the ovary grow to become a
                    fully mature Graafian follicle and simultaneously the endometrium
                    of uterus regenerates through proliferation. These changes in the
                    ovary and the uterus are induced by changes in the levels of
                    pituitary and ovarian hormones (Figure 3.9). The secretion of
HUMAN REPRODUCTION


gonadotropins (LH and FSH) increases gradually during the follicular
phase, and stimulates follicular development as well as secretion of
estrogens by the growing follicles. Both LH and FSH attain a peak level
in the middle of cycle (about 14th day). Rapid secretion of LH leading to
its maximum level during the mid-cycle called LH surge induces rupture
of Graafian follicle and thereby the release of ovum (ovulation). The
ovulation (ovulatory phase) is followed by the luteal phase during which
the remaining parts of the Graafian follicle transform as the corpus
luteum (Figure 3.9). The corpus luteum secretes large amounts of
progesterone which is essential for maintenance of the endometrium.
Such an endometrium is necessary for implantation of the fertilised
ovum and other events of pregnancy. During pregnancy all events of
the menstrual cycle stop and there is no menstruation. In the absence
of fertilisation, the corpus luteum degenerates. This causes disintegration
of the endometrium leading to menstruation, marking a new cycle. In
human beings, menstrual cycles ceases around 50 years of age; that is
termed as menopause. Cyclic menstruation is an indicator of normal
reproductive phase and extends between menarche and menopause.

3.5 FERTILISATION     AND   IMPLANTATION
During copulation (coitus) semen is released by the penis into the vagina
(insemination). The motile sperms swim rapidly, pass through the cervix,
enter into the uterus and finally reach the ampullary region of the
fallopian tube (Figure 3.11b). The ovum released by the ovary is also
transported to the ampullary region
where fertilisation takes place.
Fertilisation can only occur if the
ovum and sperms are transported
simultaneously to the ampullary
region. This is the reason why not all
copulations lead to fertilisation and
pregnancy.
     The process of fusion of a sperm
with an ovum is called fertilisation.
During fertilisation, a sperm comes in
contact with the zona pellucida layer
of the ovum (Figure 3.10) and induces
changes in the membrane that block
the entry of additional sperms. Thus,                                                    51 51
it ensures that only one sperm can
fertilise an ovum. The secretions of the
acrosome help the sperm enter into the
cytoplasm of the ovum through the
zona pellucida and the plasma
                                             Figure 3.10 Ovum surrounded by few sperms
                                                                                               BIOLOGY


                       membrane. This induces the completion of the meiotic division of the
                       secondary oocyte. The second meiotic division is also unequal and results
                       in the formation of a second polar body and a haploid ovum (ootid). Soon
                       the haploid nucleus of the sperms and that of the ovum fuse together to
                       form a diploid zygote. How many chromosomes will be there in the zygote?
                           One has to remember that the sex of the baby has been decided at this
                       stage itself. Let us see how? As you know the chromosome pattern in the
                       human female is XX and that in the male is XY. Therefore, all the haploid
                       gametes produced by the female (ova) have the sex chromosome X whereas
                       in the male gametes (sperms) the sex chromosome could be either X or Y,
                       hence, 50 per cent of sperms carry the X chromosome while the other 50 per
                       cent carry the Y. After fusion of the male and female gametes the zygote
                       would carry either XX or XY depending on whether the sperm carrying X
                       or Y fertilised the ovum. The zygote carrying XX would develop into a female
                       baby and XY would form a male (you will learn more about the chromosomal
                       patterns in Chapter 5). That is why, scientifically it is correct to say that the
                       sex of the baby is determined by the father and not by the mother!
                           The mitotic division starts as the zygote moves through the isthmus
                       of the oviduct called cleavage towards the uterus (Figure 3.11) and forms
                       2, 4, 8, 16 daughter cells called blastomeres. The embryo with 8 to 16




52




Figure 3.11 Transport of ovum, fertilisation and passage of growing embryo through fallopian tube
HUMAN REPRODUCTION


blastomeres is called a morula (Figure 3.11e). The morula continues to
divide and transforms into blastocyst (Figure 3.11g) as it moves further
into the uterus. The blastomeres in the blastocyst are arranged into an
outer layer called trophoblast and an inner group of cells attached to
trophoblast called the inner cell mass. The trophoblast layer then gets
attached to the endometrium and the inner cell mass gets differentiated
as the embryo. After attachment, the uterine cells divide rapidly and covers
the blastocyst. As a result, the blastocyst becomes embedded in the
endometrium of the uterus (Figure 3.11h). This is called implantation
and it leads to pregnancy.

3.6 PREGNANCY        AND   EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT
After implantation, finger-like projections appear on the trophoblast called
chorionic villi which are surrounded by the uterine tissue and maternal
blood. The chorionic villi and uterine tissue become interdigitated with
each other and jointly form a structural and functional unit between
developing embryo (foetus) and maternal body called placenta (Figure 3.12).
    The placenta facilitate the supply of oxygen and nutrients to the
embryo and also removal of carbon dioxide and excretory/waste materials
produced by the embryo. The placenta is connected to the embryo through
an umbilical cord which helps in the transport of substances to and from
the embryo. Placenta also acts as an endocrine tissue and produces
several hormones like human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), human
placental lactogen (hPL), estrogens, progestogens, etc. In the later
phase of pregnancy, a hormone called relaxin is also secreted by
the ovary. Let us remember
that hCG, hPL and relaxin
are produced in women
only during pregnancy. In
addition, during pregnancy
the levels of other hormones
like estrogens, progestogens,
cortisol, prolactin, thyroxine,
etc., are increased several-
folds in the maternal blood.
Increased production of these
hormones is essential for
supporting the fetal growth,
metabolic changes in the                                                                 53
mother and maintenance of
pregnancy.
    Immediately           after
implantation, the inner cell
mass (embryo) differentiates            Figure 3.12 The human foetus within the uterus
                                                                              BIOLOGY


     into an outer layer called ectoderm and an inner layer called endoderm. A
     mesoderm soon appears between the ectoderm and the endoderm. These
     three layers give rise to all tissues (organs) in adults. It needs to be mentioned
     here that the inner cell mass contains certain cells called stem cells which
     have the potency to give rise to all the tissues and organs.
         What are the major features of embryonic development at various
     months of pregnancy? The human pregnancy lasts 9 months. Do you
     know for how many months pregnancy last in dogs, elephants, cats?
     Find out. In human beings, after one month of pregnancy, the embryo’s
     heart is formed. The first sign of growing foetus may be noticed by listening
     to the heart sound carefully through the stethoscope. By the end of the
     second month of pregnancy, the foetus develops limbs and digits. By the
     end of 12 weeks (first trimester), most of the major organ systems are
     formed, for example, the limbs and external genital organs are well-
     developed. The first movements of the foetus and appearance of hair on
     the head are usually observed during the fifth month. By the end of about
     24 weeks (end of second trimester), the body is covered with fine hair,
     eye-lids separate, and eyelashes are formed. By the end of nine months
     of pregnancy, the foetus is fully developed and is ready for delivery.

     3.7 PARTURITION       AND   LACTATION
     The average duration of human pregnancy is about 9 months
     which is called the gestation period. Vigorous contraction of the uterus at
     the end of pregnancy causes expulsion/delivery of the foetus. This process
     of delivery of the foetus (childbirth) is called parturition. Parturition is
     induced by a complex neuroendocrine mechanism. The signals for
     parturition originate from the fully developed foetus and the placenta
     which induce mild uterine contractions called foetal ejection reflex. This
     triggers release of oxytocin from the maternal pituitary. Oxytocin acts on
     the uterine muscle and causes stronger uterine contractions, which in
     turn stimulates further secretion of oxytocin. The stimulatory reflex between
     the uterine contraction and oxytocin secretion continues resulting in
     stronger and stronger contractions. This leads to expulsion of the baby
     out of the uterus through the birth canal – parturition. Soon after the
     infant is delivered, the placenta is also expelled out of the uterus. What do
     you think the doctors inject to induce delivery?
         The mammary glands of the female undergo differentiation during
     pregnancy and starts producing milk towards the end of pregnancy by
54   the process called lactation. This helps the mother in feeding the new-
     born. The milk produced during the initial few days of lactation is called
     colostrum which contains several antibodies absolutely essential to
     develop resistance for the new-born babies. Breast-feeding during the
     initial period of infant growth is recommended by doctors for bringing up
     a healthy baby.
HUMAN REPRODUCTION



                                SUMMARY
  Humans are sexually reproducing and viviparous. The male
  reproductive system is composed of a pair of testes, the male sex
  accessory ducts and the accessory glands and external genitalia. Each
  testis has about 250 compartments called testicular lobules, and each
  lobule contains one to three highly coiled seminiferous tubules. Each
  seminiferous tubule is lined inside by spermatogonia and Sertoli cells.
  The spermatogonia undergo meiotic divisions leading to sperm formation,
  while Sertoli cells provide nutrition to the dividing germ cells. The Leydig
  cells outside the seminiferous tubules, synthesise and secrete testicular
  hormones called androgens. The male external genitalia is called penis.
       The female reproductive system consists of a pair of ovaries, a pair
  of oviducts, a uterus, a vagina, external genitalia, and a pair of
  mammary glands. The ovaries produce the female gamete (ovum) and
  some steroid hormones (ovarian hormones). Ovarian follicles in different
  stages of development are embedded in the stroma. The oviducts, uterus
  and vagina are female accessory ducts. The uterus has three layers
  namely perimetrium, myometrium and endometrium. The female
  external genitalia includes mons pubis, labia majora, labia minora,
  hymen and clitoris. The mammary glands are one of the female
  secondary sexual characteristics.
       Spermatogenesis results in the formation of sperms that are
  transported by the male sex accessory ducts. A normal human sperm
  is composed of a head, neck, a middle piece and tail. The process of
  formation of mature female gametes is called oogenesis. The
  reproductive cycle of female primates is called menstrual cycle.
  Menstrual cycle starts only after attaining sexual maturation (puberty).
  During ovulation only one ovum is released per menstrual cycle. The
  cyclical changes in the ovary and the uterus during menstrual cycle
  are induced by changes in the levels of pituitary and ovarian hormones.
  After coitus, sperms are transported to the junction of the isthmus and
  ampulla, where the sperm fertilises the ovum leading to formation of a
  diploid zygote. The presence of X or Y chromosome in the sperm
  determines the sex of the embryo. The zygote undergoes repeated mitotic
  division to form a blastocyst, which is implanted in the uterus resulting
  in pregnancy. After nine months of pregnancy, the fully developed foetus
  is ready for delivery. The process of childbirth is called parturition which
  is induced by a complex neuroendocrine mechanism involving cortisol,
  estrogens and oxytocin. Mammary glands differentiate during pregnancy
  and secrete milk after child-birth. The new-born baby is fed milk by the
  mother (lactation) during the initial few months of growth.



                        EXERCISES
 1.   Fill in the blanks:
                                                                                 55
      (a) Humans reproduce _____________ (asexually/sexually)
      (b) Humans are _____________ (oviparous, viviparous, ovoviviparous)
      (c) Fertilisation is _____________ in humans (external/internal)
      (d) Male and female gametes are _____________ (diploid/haploid)
      (e) Zygote is _____________ (diploid/haploid)
                                                                             BIOLOGY


           (f) The process of release of ovum from a mature follicle is called
               _____________
           (g) Ovulation is induced by a hormone called _____________
           (h) The fusion of male and female gametes is called _____________
           (i) Fertilisation takes place in _____________
           (j) Zygote divides to form _____________which is implanted in uterus.
           (k) The structure which provides vascular connection between foetus
               and uterus is called _____________
      2.   Draw a labelled diagram of male reproductive system.
      3.   Draw a labelled diagram of female reproductive system.
      4.   Write two major functions each of testis and ovary.
      5.   Describe the structure of a seminiferous tubule.
      6.   What is spermatogenesis? Briefly describe the process of spermatogenesis.
      7.   Name the hormones involved in regulation of spermatogenesis.
      8.   Define spermiogenesis and spermiation.
      9.   Draw a labelled diagram of sperm.
     10. What are the major components of seminal plasma?
     11. What are the major functions of male accessory ducts and glands?
     12. What is oogenesis? Give a brief account of oogenesis.
     13. Draw a labelled diagram of a section through ovary.
     14. Draw a labelled diagram of a Graafian follicle?
     15. Name the functions of the following:
           (a) Corpus luteum         (b) Endometrium
           (c) Acrosome              (d) Sperm tail
           (e) Fimbriae
     16. Identify True/False statements. Correct each false statement to make
         it true.
           (a) Androgens are produced by Sertoli cells. (True/False)
           (b) Spermatozoa get nutrition from Sertoli cells. (True/False)
           (c) Leydig cells are found in ovary. (True/False)
           (d) Leydig cells synthesise androgens. (True/False)
           (e) Oogenesis takes place in corpus luteum. (True/False)
           (f) Menstrual cycle ceases during pregnancy. (True/False)
           (g) Presence or absence of hymen is not a reliable indicator of virginity
               or sexual experience. (True/False)
     17. What is menstrual cycle? Which hormones regulate menstrual cycle?
     18. What is parturition? Which hormones are involved in induction of parturition?
     19. In our society the women are often blamed for giving birth to daughters.
         Can you explain why this is not correct?
56
     20. How many eggs are released by a human ovary in a month? How many
         eggs do you think would have been released if the mother gave birth to
         identical twins? Would your answer change if the twins born were
         fraternal?
     21. How many eggs do you think were released by the ovary of a female dog
         which gave birth to 6 puppies?
                                                                                             BIOLOGY




CHAPTER 7

EVOLUTION


  7.1   Origin of Life
  7.2   Evolution of Life Forms - A
        Theory                        Evolutionary Biology is the study of history of life forms
  7.3   What are the Evidences        on earth. What exactly is evolution? To understand the
        for Evolution?                changes in flora and fauna that have occurred over millions
  7.4   What is Adaptive              of years on earth, we must have an understanding of the
        Radiation?                    context of origin of life, i.e., evolution of earth, of stars and
  7.5   Biological Evolution          indeed of the universe itself. What follows is the longest of
  7.6   Mechanism of Evolution        all the construed and conjectured stories. This is the story
  7.7   Hardy - Weinberg              of origin of life and evolution of life forms or biodiversity on
        Principle                     planet earth in the context of evolution of earth and against
  7.8   A Brief Account of            the background of evolution of universe itself.
        Evolution
                                      7.1 ORIGIN     OF   LIFE
  7.9   Origin and Evolution of
        Man                           When we look at stars on a clear night sky we are, in a
                                      way, looking back in time. Stellar distances are measured
                                      in light years. What we see today is an object whose emitted
                                      light started its journey millions of year back and from
                                      trillions of kilometres away and reaching our eyes now.
 126                                  However, when we see objects in our immediate
                                      surroundings we see them instantly and hence in the
                                      present time. Therefore, when we see stars we apparently
                                      are peeping into the past.
                                           The origin of life is considered a unique event in the
                                      history of universe. The universe is vast. Relatively speaking




                                                                                               2017-18
EVOLUTION

the earth itself is almost only a speck. The universe is very
old – almost 20 billion years old. Huge clusters of galaxies comprise the
universe. Galaxies contain stars and clouds of gas and dust. Considering
the size of universe, earth is indeed a speck. The Big Bang theory attempts
to explain to us the origin of universe. It talks of a singular huge explosion
unimaginable in physical terms. The universe expanded and hence, the
temperature came down. Hydrogen and Helium formed sometime later.
The gases condensed under gravitation and formed the galaxies of the
present day universe. In the solar system of the milky way galaxy, earth
was supposed to have been formed about 4.5 billion years back. There
was no atmosphere on early earth. Water vapour, methane, carbondioxide
and ammonia released from molten mass covered the surface. The UV rays
from the sun brokeup water into Hydrogen and Oxygen and the lighter H2
escaped. Oxygen combined with ammonia and methane to form water,
CO2 and others. The ozone layer was formed. As it cooled, the water vapor
fell as rain, to fill all the depressions and form oceans. Life appeared 500
million years after the formation of earth, i.e., almost four billion years back.
     Did life come from outerspace? Some scientists believe that it came
from outside. Early Greek thinkers thought units of life called spores
were transferred to different planets including earth. ‘Panspermia’ is still
a favourite idea for some astronomers. For a long time it was also believed
that life came out of decaying and rotting matter like straw, mud, etc.
This was the theory of spontaneous generation. Louis Pasteur by careful
experimentation demonstrated that life comes only from pre-existing life.
He showed that in pre-sterilised flasks, life did not come from killed yeast
while in another flask open to air, new living organisms arose from ‘killed
yeast’. Spontaneous generation theory was dismissed once and for all.
However, this did not answer how the first life form came on earth.
     Oparin of Russia and Haldane of England proposed that the first form
of life could have come from pre-existing non-living organic molecules
(e.g. RNA, protein, etc.) and that formation of life was preceded by chemical
evolution, i.e., formation of diverse organic molecules from inorganic
constituents. The conditions on earth were – high temperature, volcanic
storms, reducing atmosphere containing CH4, NH3, etc. In 1953, S.L. Miller,
an American scientist created similar conditions in a laboratory scale
(Figure 7.1). He created electric discharge in a closed flask containing
CH4, H2, NH3 and water vapour at 8000C. He observed formation of amino
acids. In similar experiments others observed, formation of sugars,
nitrogen bases, pigment and fats. Analysis of meteorite content also                127
revealed similar compounds indicating that similar processes are
occurring elsewhere in space. With this limited evidence, the first part of
the conjectured story, i.e., chemical evolution was more or less accepted.
     We have no idea about how the first self replicating metabolic capsule
of life arose. The first non-cellular forms of life could have originated




                                                                                     2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY




                 Figure 7.1 Diagrammatic representation of Miller’s
                                   experiment


      3 billion years back. They would have been giant molecules (RNA, Protein,
      Polysaccharides, etc.). These capsules reproduced their molecules perhaps.
      The first cellular form of life did not possibly originate till about 2000
      million years ago. These were probably single-cells. All life forms were in
      water environment only. This version of a biogenesis, i.e., the first form of
      life arose slowly through evolutionary forces from non-living molecules is
      accepted by majority. However, once formed, how the first cellular forms
      of life could have evolved into the complex biodiversity of today is the
      fascinating story that will be discussed below.

      7.2 EVOLUTION       OF   LIFE FORMS – A THEORY
      Conventional religious literature tells us about the theory of special
      creation. This theory has three connotations. One, that all living organisms
      (species or types) that we see today were created as such. Two, that the
      diversity was always the same since creation and will be the same in future
      also. Three, that earth is about 4000 years old. All these ideas were
128   strongly challenged during the nineteenth century. Based on observations
      made during a sea voyage in a sail ship called H.M.S. Beagle round the
      world, Charles Darwin concluded that existing living forms share
      similarities to varying degrees not only among themselves but also with
      life forms that existed millions of years ago. Many such life forms do not
      exist any more. There had been extinctions of different life forms in the




                                                                           2017-18
EVOLUTION

years gone by just as new forms of life arose at different periods of history
of earth. There has been gradual evolution of life forms. Any population
has built in variation in characteristics. Those characteristics which enable
some to survive better in natural conditions (climate, food, physical factors,
etc.) would outbreed others that are less-endowed to survive under such
natural conditions. Another word used is fitness of the individual or
population. The fitness, according to Darwin, refers ultimately and only
to reproductive fitness. Hence, those who are better fit in an environment,
leave more progeny than others. These, therefore, will survive more and
hence are selected by nature. He called it natural selection and implied it
as a mechanism of evolution. Let us also remember that Alfred Wallace, a
naturalist who worked in Malay Archipelago had also come to similar
conclusions around the same time. In due course of time, apparently new
types of organisms are recognisable. All the existing life forms share
similarities and share common ancestors. However, these ancestors were
present at different periods in the history of earth (epochs, periods and
eras). The geological history of earth closely correlates with the biological
history of earth. A common permissible conclusion is that earth is very
old, not thousand of years as was thought earlier but billions of years old.

7.3 WHAT ARE THE EVIDENCES FOR EVOLUTION?
Evidence that evolution of life forms has indeed taken place on earth has
come from many quarters. Fossils are remains of hard parts of
life-forms found in rocks. Rocks form sediments and a cross-section of
earth's crust indicates the arrangement of sediments one over the other
during the long history of earth. Different-aged rock sediments contain
fossils of different life-forms who probably died during the formation of
the particular sediment. Some of them appear similar to modern
organisms (Figure 7.2). They represent extinct organisms (e.g., Dinosaurs).
A study of fossils in different sedimentary layers indicates the geological
period in which they existed. The study showed that life-forms varied
over time and certain life forms are restricted to certain geological time-
spans. Hence, new forms of life have arisen at different times in the history
of earth. All this is called paleontological evidence. Do you remember
how the ages of the fossils are calculated? Do you recollect the method
of radioactive-dating and the principles behind the procedure? (Please
see Page 289 also)
     Comparative anatomy and morphology shows similarities and
differences among organisms of today and those that existed years ago.           129
Such similarities can be interpreted to understand whether common
ancestors were shared or not. For example whales, bats, Cheetah and
human (all mammals) share similarities in the pattern of bones of forelimbs
(Figure 7.3b). Though these forelimbs perform different functions in these
animals, they have similar anatomical structure – all of them have




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                          BIOLOGY




 Figure 7.2 A family tree of dinosaurs and their living modern day counterpart organisms like
            crocodiles and birds


                      humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metacarpals and phalanges in their
                      forelimbs. Hence, in these animals, the same structure developed along
                      different directions due to adaptations to different needs. This is divergent
130
                      evolution and these structures are homologous. Homology indicates
                      common ancestry. Other examples are vertebrate hearts or brains. In
                      plants also, the thorn and tendrils of Bougainvillea and Cucurbita
                      represent homology (Figure 7.3a). Homology is based on divergent
                      evolution whereas analogy refers to a situation exactly opposite. Wings of
                      butterfly and of birds look alike. They are not anatomically similar




                                                                                           2017-18
EVOLUTION

structures though they perform similar
functions. Hence, analogous structures
are a result of convergent evolution -
different structures evolving for the same
                                                                                         Tendril
function and hence having similarity.
Other examples of analogy are the eye of
the octopus and of mammals or the
flippers of Penguins and Dolphins. One
can say that it is the similar habitat that
has resulted in selection of similar
adaptive features in different groups of
organisms but toward the same function:                                    (a)
Sweet potato (root modification) and
potato (stem modification) is another
example for analogy.
     In the same line of argument,
similarities in proteins and genes
performing a given function among
diverse organisms give clues to common
ancestry. These biochemical similarities
point to the same shared ancestry as
structural similarities among diverse
organisms.
     Man has bred selected plants and
animals for agriculture, horticulture, sport
or security. Man has domesticated many
wild animals and crops. This intensive
breeding programme has created breeds
that differ from other breeds (e.g., dogs) but
still are of the same group. It is argued that
if within hundreds of years, man could
create new breeds, could not nature have
done the same over millions of years?                                      (b)
     Another interesting observation               Figure 7.3 Example of homologous organs in
supporting evolution by natural selection                     (a) Plants and (b) Animals
comes from England. In a collection of
moths made in 1850s, i.e., before industrialisation set in, it was observed
that there were more white-winged moths on trees than dark-winged or
melanised moths. However, in the collection carried out from the same                        131
area, but after industrialisation, i.e., in 1920, there were more dark-winged
moths in the same area, i.e., the proportion was reversed.
     The explanation put forth for this observation was that ‘predators will
spot a moth against a contrasting background’. During post-
industrialisation period, the tree trunks became dark due to industrial
smoke and soots. Under this condition the white-winged moth did not




                                                                                             2017-18
                                                                                          BIOLOGY




                     (a)                                                 (b)

      Figure 7.4 Figure showing white - winged moth and dark - winged moth (melanised)
                 on a tree trunk (a) In unpolluted area (b) In polluted area


                      survive due to predators, dark-winged or melanised moth survived. Before
                      industrialisation set in, thick growth of almost white-coloured lichen
                      covered the trees - in that background the white winged moth survived
                      but the dark-coloured moth were picked out by predators. Do you know
                      that lichens can be used as industrial pollution indicators? They will
                      not grow in areas that are polluted. Hence, moths that were able to
                      camouflage themselves, i.e., hide in the background, survived
                      (Figure 7.4). This understanding is supported by the fact that in areas
                      where industrialisation did not occur e.g., in rural areas, the count of
                      melanic moths was low. This showed that in a mixed population, those
                      that can better-adapt, survive and increase in population size. Remember
                      that no variant is completely wiped out.
                          Similarly, excess use of herbicides, pesticides, etc., has only resulted
                      in selection of resistant varieties in a much lesser time scale. This is also
                      true for microbes against which we employ antibiotics or drugs against
                      eukaryotic organisms/cell. Hence, resistant organisms/cells are appearing
                      in a time scale of months or years and not centuries. These are examples
                      of evolution by anthropogenic action. This also tells us that evolution is not
                      a directed process in the sense of determinism. It is a stochastic process
                      based on chance events in nature and chance mutation in the organisms.


                      7.4 WHAT      IS   ADAPTIVE RADIATION?
132                   During his journey Darwin went to Galapagos Islands. There he observed
                      an amazing diversity of creatures. Of particular interest, small black birds
                      later called Darwin’s Finches amazed him. He realised that there were many
                      varieties of finches in the same island. All the varieties, he conjectured,
                      evolved on the island itself. From the original seed-eating features, many
                      other forms with altered beaks arose, enabling them to become insectivorous




                                                                                            2017-18
EVOLUTION




            Figure 7.5 Variety of beaks of finches that Darwin found in Galapagos Island


and vegetarian finches (Figure 7.5). This process of evolution of different
species in a given geographical area starting from a point and literally
radiating to other areas of geography (habitats) is called adaptive radiation.
Darwin’s finches represent one of the best examples of this phenomenon.
Another example is Australian marsupials. A number of marsupials, each
different from the other (Figure 7.6) evolved from an ancestral stock, but
all within the Australian island continent. When more than one adaptive
radiation appeared to have occurred in an isolated geographical area
(representing different habitats), one can call this convergent evolution.




                                                                                           133




                      Figure 7.6 Adaptive radiation of marsupials of Australia




                                                                                            2017-18
                                                                                              BIOLOGY

                                                     Placental mammals in Australia also exhibit
                                                     adaptive radiation in evolving into varieties
                                                     of such placental mammals each of which
                                                     appears to be ‘similar’ to a corresponding
                                                     marsupial (e.g., Placental wolf and Tasmanian
                                                     wolf-marsupial). (Figure 7.7).

                                                     7.5 BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION
                                                    Evolution by natural selection, in a true sense
                                                    would have started when cellular forms of life
                                                    with differences in metabolic capability
                                                    originated on earth.
                                                          The essence of Darwinian theory about
                                                    evolution is natural selection. The rate of
                                                    appearance of new forms is linked to the life
                                                    cycle or the life span. Microbes that divide fast
                                                    have the ability to multiply and become millions
                                                    of individuals within hours. A colony of bacteria
                                                    (say A) growing on a given medium has built-
                                                    in variation in terms of ability to utilise a feed
                                                    component. A change in the medium
                                                    composition would bring out only that part of
                                                    the population (say B) that can survive under
                                                    the new conditions. In due course of time this
                                                    variant population outgrows the others and
                                                    appears as new species. This would happen
                                                    within days. For the same thing to happen in a
                                                    fish or fowl would take million of years as life
                                                    spans of these animals are in years. Here we
                                                    say that fitness of B is better than that of A under
                                                    the new conditions. Nature selects for fitness.
Figure 7.7   Picture showing convergent evolution
                                                    One must remember that the so-called fitness
             of Australian Marsupials and
             placental mammals                      is based on characteristics which are inherited.
                                                    Hence, there must be a genetic basis for getting
                       selected and to evolve. Another way of saying the same thing is that some
                       organisms are better adapted to survive in an otherwise hostile environment.
                       Adaptive ability is inherited. It has a genetic basis. Fitness is the end result
134                    of the ability to adapt and get selected by nature.
                           Branching descent and natural selection are the two key concepts
                       of Darwinian Theory of Evolution (Figures 7.7 and 7.8).
                           Even before Darwin, a French naturalist Lamarck had said that
                       evolution of life forms had occurred but driven by use and disuse of
                       organs. He gave the examples of Giraffes who in an attempt to forage




                                                                                                2017-18
EVOLUTION

leaves on tall trees had to adapt by elongation of their necks. As they
passed on this acquired character of elongated neck to succeeding
generations, Giraffes, slowly, over the years, came to acquire long
necks. Nobody believes this conjecture any more.
    Is evolution a process or the result of a process? The world we see,
inanimate and animate, is only the success stories of evolution. When we
describe the story of this world we describe evolution as a process. On the
other hand when we describe the story of life on earth, we treat evolution
as a consequence of a process called natural selection. We are still not
very clear whether to regard evolution and natural selection as processes
or end result of unknown processes.
    It is possible that the work of Thomas Malthus on populations
influenced Darwin. Natural selection is based on certain observations
which are factual. For example, natural resources are limited, populations
are stable in size except for seasonal fluctuation, members of a population
vary in characteristics (infact no two individuals are alike) even though
they look superficially similar, most of variations are inherited etc. The
fact that theoretically population size will grow exponentially if everybody
reproduced maximally (this fact can be seen in a growing bacterial
population) and the fact that population sizes in reality are limited, means
that there had been competition for resources. Only some survived and
grew at the cost of others that could not flourish. The novelty and brilliant
insight of Darwin was this: he asserted that variations, which are heritable
and which make resource utilisation better for few (adapted to habitat
better) will enable only those to reproduce and leave more progeny. Hence
for a period of time, over many generations, survivors will leave more
progeny and there would be a change in population characteristic and
hence new forms appear to arise.

7.6 MECHANISM        OF   EVOLUTION
What is the origin of this variation and how does speciation occur? Even
though Mendel had talked of inheritable 'factors' influencing phenotype,
Darwin either ignored these observations or kept silence. In the first decade
of twentieth century, Hugo deVries based on his work on evening primrose
brought forth the idea of mutations – large difference arising suddenly in
a population. He believed that it is mutation which causes evolution and
not the minor variations (heritable) that Darwin talked about. Mutations        135
are random and directionless while Darwinian variations are small and
directional. Evolution for Darwin was gradual while deVries believed
mutation caused speciation and hence called it saltation (single step
large mutation). Studies in population genetics, later, brought out
some clarity.




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                                         BIOLOGY

                     7.7 HARDY-WEINBERG PRINCIPLE
                     In a given population one can find out the frequency of occurrence of
                     alleles of a gene or a locus. This frequency is supposed to remain fixed
                     and even remain the same through generations. Hardy-Weinberg principle
                     stated it using algebraic equations.
                         This principle says that allele frequencies in a population are stable
                     and is constant from generation to generation. The gene pool (total genes
                     and their alleles in a population) remains a constant. This is called genetic
                     equilibrium. Sum total of all the allelic frequencies is 1. Individual




                                                                                  (a)




                                                                                              (b)




                                                                                 (c)
136



Figure 7.8 Diagrammatic representation of the operation of natural selection on different
           traits : (a) Stabilising (b) Directional and (c) Disruptive




                                                                                          2017-18
EVOLUTION

frequencies, for example, can be named p, q, etc. In a diploid, p and q
represent the frequency of allele A and allele a . The frequency of AA
individuals in a population is simply p2. This is simply stated in another
ways, i.e., the probability that an allele A with a frequency of p appear on
both the chromosomes of a diploid individual is simply the product
of the probabilities, i.e., p2. Similarly of aa is q2, of Aa 2pq. Hence,
p2+2pq+q2=1. This is a binomial expansion of (p+q)2. When frequency
measured, differs from expected values, the difference (direction) indicates
the extent of evolutionary change. Disturbance in genetic equilibrium, or
Hardy- Weinberg equilibrium, i.e., change of frequency of alleles in a
population would then be interpreted as resulting in evolution.
     Five factors are known to affect Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. These
are gene migration or gene flow, genetic drift, mutation, genetic
recombination and natural selection. When migration of a section of
population to another place and population occurs, gene frequencies
change in the original as well as in the new population. New genes/alleles
are added to the new population and these are lost from the old population.
There would be a gene flow if this gene migration, happens multiple times.
If the same change occurs by chance, it is called genetic drift. Sometimes
the change in allele frequency is so different in the new sample of population
that they become a different species. The original drifted population
becomes founders and the effect is called founder effect.
     Microbial experiments show that pre-existing advantageous
mutations when selected will result in observation of new phenotypes.
Over few generations, this would result in Speciation. Natural selection is
a process in which heritable variations enabling better survival are enabled
to reproduce and leave greater number of progeny. A critical analysis
makes us believe that variation due to mutation or variation due to
recombination during gametogenesis, or due to gene flow or genetic drift
results in changed frequency of genes and alleles in future generation.
Coupled to enhance reproductive success, natural selection makes it look
like different population. Natural selection can lead to stabilisation (in
which more individuals acquire mean character value), directional change
(more individuals acquire value other than the mean character value) or
disruption (more individuals acquire peripheral character value at both
ends of the distribution curve) (Figure 7.8).
                                                                                 137
7.8 A BRIEF ACCOUNT           OF   EVOLUTION
About 2000 million years ago (mya) the first cellular forms of life appeared
on earth. The mechanism of how non-cellular aggregates of giant
macromolecules could evolve into cells with membranous envelop is
not known. Some of these cells had the ability to release O2. The reaction




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                       BIOLOGY




      Figure 7.9 A sketch of the evolution of plant forms through geological periods


                   could have been similar to the light reaction in photosynthesis where water
                   is split with the help of solar energy captured and channelised by
                   appropriate light harvesting pigments. Slowly single-celled organisms
                   became multi-cellular life forms. By the time of 500 mya, invertebrates
                   were formed and active. Jawless fish probably evolved around 350 mya.
138                Sea weeds and few plants existed probably around 320 mya. We are told
                   that the first organisms that invaded land were plants. They were
                   widespread on land when animals invaded land. Fish with stout and strong
                   fins could move on land and go back to water. This was about 350 mya. In
                   1938, a fish caught in South Africa happened to be a Coelacanth which
                   was thought to be extinct. These animals called lobefins evolved into the




                                                                                        2017-18
EVOLUTION




      Figure 7.10 Representative evolutionary history of vertebrates through geological periods

                                                                                                  139
first amphibians that lived on both land and water. There are no specimens
of these left with us. However, these were ancestors of modern day frogs
and salamanders. The amphibians evolved into reptiles. They lay thick-
shelled eggs which do not dry up in sun unlike those of amphibians. Again
we only see their modern day descendents, the turtles, tortoises and
crocodiles. In the next 200 millions years or so, reptiles of different shapes




                                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY

      and sizes dominated on earth. Giant ferns (pteridophytes) were present
      but they all fell to form coal deposits slowly. Some of these land reptiles
      went back into water to evolve into fish like reptiles probably 200 mya
      (e.g. Ichthyosaurs). The land reptiles were, of course, the dinosaurs. The
      biggest of them, i.e., Tyrannosaurus rex was about 20 feet in height and
      had huge fearsome dagger like teeth. About 65 mya, the dinosaurs
      suddenly disappeared from the earth. We do not know the true reason.
      Some say climatic changes killed them. Some say most of them evolved
      into birds. The truth may live in between. Small sized reptiles of that era
      still exist today.
           The first mammals were like shrews. Their fossils are small sized.
      Mammals were viviparous and protected their unborn young inside the
      mother’s body. Mammals were more intelligent in sensing and avoiding
      danger at least. When reptiles came down mammals took over this earth.
      There were in South America mammals resembling horse, hippopotamus,
      bear, rabbit, etc. Due to continental drift, when South America joined
      North America, these animals were overridden by North American fauna.
      Due to the same continental drift pouched mammals of Australia survived
      because of lack of competition from any other mammal.
           Lest we forget, some mammals live wholly in water. Whales, dolphins,
      seals and sea cows are some examples. Evolution of horse, elephant, dog,
      etc., are special stories of evolution. You will learn about these in higher
      classes. The most successful story is the evolution of man with language
      skills and self-consciousness.
           A rough sketch of the evolution of life forms, their times on a geological
      scale are indicated in (Figure 7.9 and 7.10).

      7.9 ORIGIN      AND   EVOLUTION      OF   MAN
      About 15 mya, primates called Dryopithecus and Ramapithecus were
      existing. They were hairy and walked like gorillas and chimpanzees.
      Ramapithecus was more man-like while Dryopithecus was more
      ape-like. Few fossils of man-like bones have been discovered in Ethiopia
      and Tanzania (Figure 7.11). These revealed hominid features leading to
      the belief that about 3-4 mya, man-like primates walked in eastern Africa.
      They were probably not taller than 4 feet but walked up right. Two mya,
      Australopithecines probably lived in East African grasslands. Evidence
140
      shows they hunted with stone weapons but essentially ate fruit. Some of
      the bones among the bones discovered were different. This creature was
      called the first human-like being the hominid and was called Homo habilis.
      The brain capacities were between 650-800cc. They probably did not eat
      meat. Fossils discovered in Java in 1891 revealed the next stage, i.e., Homo




                                                                             2017-18
EVOLUTION




Figure 7.11 A comparison of the skulls of adult modern human being, baby chimpanzee and
            adult chimpanzee. The skull of baby chimpanzee is more like adult human skull
            than adult chimpanzee skull


erectus about 1.5 mya. Homo erectus had a large brain around 900cc.
Homo erectus probably ate meat. The Neanderthal man with a brain size
of 1400cc lived in near east and central Asia between 1,00,000-40,000
years back. They used hides to protect their body and buried their dead.
Homo sapiens arose in Africa and moved across continents and developed               141
into distinct races. During ice age between 75,000-10,000 years ago
modern Homo sapiens arose. Pre-historic cave art developed about
18,000 years ago. Agriculture came around 10,000 years back and
human settlements started. The rest of what happened is part of human
history of growth and decline of civilisations.




                                                                                      2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY




                                    SUMMARY
       The origin of life on earth can be understood only against the
       background of origin of universe especially earth. Most scientists
       believe chemical evolution, i.e., formation of biomolecules preceded
       the appearance of the first cellular forms of life. The subsequent events
       as to what happened to the first form of life is a conjectured story
       based on Darwinian ideas of organic evolution by natural selection.
       Diversity of life forms on earth has been changing over millions of
       years. It is generally believed that variations in a population result in
       variable fitness. Other phenomena like habitat fragmentation and
       genetic drift may accentuate these variations leading to appearance
       of new species and hence evolution. Homology is accounted for by the
       idea of branching descent. Study of comparative anatomy, fossils and
       comparative biochemistry provides evidence for evolution. Among the
       stories of evolution of individual species, the story of evolution of
       modern man is most interesting and appears to parallel evolution of
       human brain and language.




                            EXERCISES
      1.   Explain antibiotic resistance observed in bacteria in light of Darwinian
           selection theory.
      2.   Find out from newspapers and popular science articles any new fossil
           discoveries or controversies about evolution.
      3.   Attempt giving a clear definition of the term species.
      4.   Try to trace the various components of human evolution (hint: brain
           size and function, skeletal structure, dietary preference, etc.)
      5.   Find out through internet and popular science articles whether animals
           other than man has self-consciousness.
      6.   List 10 modern-day animals and using the internet resources link it to
           a corresponding ancient fossil. Name both.
      7.   Practise drawing various animals and plants.
      8.   Describe one example of adaptive radiation.
      9.   Can we call human evolution as adaptive radiation?
      10. Using various resources such as your school Library or the internet
142       and discussions with your teacher, trace the evolutionary stages of
          any one animal, say horse.




                                                                           2017-18
                                 Ever since the days of Rene Descartes, the French philosopher,
Chapter 11                       mathematician and biologist of seventeenth century, all human
Biotechnology : Principles and   knowledge especially natural sciences were directed to develop
Processes                        technologies which add to the creature comforts of human
                                 lives, as also value to human life. The whole approach to
Chapter 12                       understanding natural phenomena became anthropocentric.
Biotechnology and Its            Physics and chemistry gave rise to engineering, technologies
Applications                     and industries which all worked for human comfort and welfare.
                                 The major utility of the biological world is as a source of food.
                                 Biotechnology, the twentieth century off-shoot of modern
                                 biology, changed our daily life as its products brought
                                 qualitative improvement in health and food production. The
                                 basic principles underlying biotechnological processes and some
                                 applications are highlighted and discussed in this unit.
                Herbert Boyer was born in 1936 and brought up in a corner of western
                Pennsylvania where railroads and mines were the destiny of most young
                men. He completed graduate work at the University of Pittsburgh, in
                1963, followed by three years of post-graduate studies at Yale.
                    In 1966, Boyer took over assistant professorship at the University of
                California at San Francisco. By 1969, he performed studies on a couple
                of restriction enzymes of the E. coli bacterium with especially useful
                properties. Boyer observed that these enzymes have the capability of
                cutting DNA strands in a particular fashion, which left what has became
                known as ‘sticky ends’ on the strands. These clipped ends made pasting
                together pieces of DNA a precise exercise.
                    This discovery, in turn, led to a rich and rewarding conversation in
                Hawaii with a Stanford scientist named Stanley Cohen. Cohen had
                been studying small ringlets of DNA called plasmids and which float
                about freely in the cytoplasm of certain bacterial cells and replicate
HERBERT BOYER   independently from the coding strand of DNA. Cohen had developed
  (1936 )       a method of removing these plasmids from the cell and then reinserting
                them in other cells. Combining this process with that of DNA splicing
                enabled Boyer and Cohen to recombine segments of DNA in desired
                configurations and insert the DNA in bacterial cells, which could then
                act as manufacturing plants for specific proteins. This breakthrough was
                the basis upon which the discipline of biotechnology was founded.
CHAPTER 11

BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES
AND PROCESSES

11.1 Principles of Biotechnology

11.2 Tools of Recombinant DNA      Biotechnology deals with techniques of using live
     Technology                    organisms or enzymes from organisms to produce products
                                   and processes useful to humans. In this sense, making
11.3 Processes of Recombinant      curd, bread or wine, which are all microbe-mediated
                                   processes, could also be thought as a form of
     DNA Technology
                                   biotechnology. However, it is used in a restricted sense
                                   today, to refer to such of those processes which use
                                   genetically modified organisms to achieve the same on a
                                   larger scale. Further, many other processes/techniques are
                                   also included under biotechnology. For example, in vitro
                                   fertilisation leading to a ‘test-tube’ baby, synthesising a
                                   gene and using it, developing a DNA vaccine or correcting
                                   a defective gene, are all part of biotechnology.
                                       The European Federation of Biotechnology (EFB) has
                                   given a definition of biotechnology that encompasses both
                                   traditional view and modern molecular biotechnology.
                                   The definition given by EFB is as follows:
                                       ‘The integration of natural science and organisms,
                                   cells, parts thereof, and molecular analogues for products
                                   and services’.

                                   11.1 PRINCIPLES       OF   BIOTECHNOLOGY
                                   Among many, the two core techniques that enabled birth
                                   of modern biotechnology are :
                                       (i) Genetic engineering : Techniques to alter the
                                            chemistry of genetic material (DNA and RNA),
                                                                            BIOLOGY


                to introduce these into host organisms and thus change the
                phenotype of the host organism.
           (ii) Maintenance of sterile (microbial contamination-free) ambience
                in chemical engineering processes to enable growth of only the
                desired microbe/eukaryotic cell in large quantities for the
                manufacture of biotechnological products like antibiotics,
                vaccines, enzymes, etc.
          Let us now understand the conceptual development of the principles
      of genetic engineering.
          You probably appreciate the advantages of sexual reproduction over
      asexual reproduction. The former provides opportunities for variations
      and formulation of unique combinations of genetic setup, some of which
      may be beneficial to the organism as well as the population. Asexual
      reproduction preserves the genetic information, while sexual reproduction
      permits variation. Traditional hybridisation procedures used in plant and
      animal breeding, very often lead to inclusion and multiplication of
      undesirable genes along with the desired genes. The techniques of genetic
      engineering which include creation of recombinant DNA, use of
      gene cloning and gene transfer, overcome this limitation and allows us
      to isolate and introduce only one or a set of desirable genes without
      introducing undesirable genes into the target organism.
          Do you know the likely fate of a piece of DNA, which is somehow
      transferred into an alien organism? Most likely, this piece of DNA would
      not be able to multiply itself in the progeny cells of the organism. But,
      when it gets integrated into the genome of the recipient, it may multiply
      and be inherited along with the host DNA. This is because the alien piece
      of DNA has become part of a chromosome, which has the ability to
      replicate. In a chromosome there is a specific DNA sequence called the
      origin of replication, which is responsible for initiating replication.
      Therefore, for the multiplication of any alien piece of DNA in an organism
      it needs to be a part of a chromosome(s) which has a specific sequence
      known as ‘origin of replication’. Thus, an alien DNA is linked with the
      origin of replication, so that, this alien piece of DNA can replicate and
      multiply itself in the host organism. This can also be called as cloning or
      making multiple identical copies of any template DNA.
          Let us now focus on the first instance of the construction of an artificial
      recombinant DNA molecule. The construction of the first recombinant
      DNA emerged from the possibility of linking a gene encoding antibiotic
194   resistance with a native plasmid (autonomously replicating circular
      extra-chromosomal DNA) of Salmonella typhimurium. Stanley Cohen and
      Herbert Boyer accomplished this in 1972 by isolating the antibiotic
      resistance gene by cutting out a piece of DNA from a plasmid which was
      responsible for conferring antibiotic resistance. The cutting of DNA at
      specific locations became possible with the discovery of the so-called
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


‘molecular scissors’– restriction enzymes. The cut piece of DNA was
then linked with the plasmid DNA. These plasmid DNA act as vectors to
transfer the piece of DNA attached to it. You probably know that mosquito
acts as an insect vector to transfer the malarial parasite into human body.
In the same way, a plasmid can be used as vector to deliver an alien piece
of DNA into the host organism. The linking of antibiotic resistance gene
with the plasmid vector became possible with the enzyme DNA ligase,
which acts on cut DNA molecules and joins their ends. This makes a new
combination of circular autonomously replicating DNA created in vitro
and is known as recombinant DNA. When this DNA is transferred into
Escherichia coli, a bacterium closely related to Salmonella, it could
replicate using the new host’s DNA polymerase enzyme and make multiple
copies. The ability to multiply copies of antibiotic resistance gene in
E. coli was called cloning of antibiotic resistance gene in E. coli.
     You can hence infer that there are three basic steps in genetically
modifying an organism —
   (i) identification of DNA with desirable genes;
 (ii) introduction of the identified DNA into the host;
 (iii) maintenance of introduced DNA in the host and transfer of the DNA
       to its progeny.

11.2 TOOLS        OF   RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY
Now we know from the foregoing discussion that genetic engineering or
recombinant DNA technology can be accomplished only if we have the
key tools, i.e., restriction enzymes, polymerase enzymes, ligases, vectors
and the host organism. Let us try to understand some of these in detail.

11.2.1 Restriction Enzymes
In the year 1963, the two enzymes responsible for restricting the growth
of bacteriophage in Escherichia coli were isolated. One of these added
methyl groups to DNA, while the other cut DNA. The later was called
restriction endonuclease.
    The first restriction endonuclease–Hind II, whose functioning
depended on a specific DNA nucleotide sequence was isolated and
characterised five years later. It was found that Hind II always cut DNA
molecules at a particular point by recognising a specific sequence of
six base pairs. This specific base sequence is known as the
recognition sequence for Hind II. Besides Hind II, today we know more
than 900 restriction enzymes that have been isolated from over 230 strains     195
of bacteria each of which recognise different recognition sequences.
    The convention for naming these enzymes is the first letter of the name
comes from the genus and the second two letters come from the species of
the prokaryotic cell from which they were isolated, e.g., EcoRI comes from
Escherichia coli RY 13. In EcoRI, the letter ‘R’ is derived from the name of
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                    strain. Roman numbers following the names indicate the order in which
                    the enzymes were isolated from that strain of bacteria.
                        Restriction enzymes belong to a larger class of enzymes called
                    nucleases. These are of two kinds; exonucleases and endonucleases.
                    Exonucleases remove nucleotides from the ends of the DNA whereas,
                    endonucleases make cuts at specific positions within the DNA.
                        Each restriction endonuclease functions by ‘inspecting’ the length of
                    a DNA sequence. Once it finds its specific recognition sequence, it
                    will bind to the DNA and cut each of the two strands of the double
                    helix at specific points in their sugar -phosphate backbones
                    (Figure 11.1). Each restriction endonuclease recognises a specific
                    palindromic nucleotide sequences in the DNA.




Figure 11.1 Steps in formation of recombinant DNA by action of restriction endonuclease
            enzyme - EcoRI


196
                        Do you know what palindromes are? These are groups of letters
                    that form the same words when read both forward and backward,
                    e.g., “MALAYALAM”. As against a word-palindrome where the same
                    word is read in both directions, the palindrome in DNA is a sequence
                    of base pairs that reads same on the two strands when orientation of
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


reading is kept the same. For example, the following sequences reads
the same on the two strands in 5' à 3' direction. This is also true if
read in the 3' à 5' direction.
                           5' —— GAATTC —— 3'
                           3' —— CTTAAG —— 5'
    Restriction enzymes cut the strand of DNA a little away from the centre
of the palindrome sites, but between the same two bases on the opposite
strands. This leaves single stranded portions at the ends. There are
overhanging stretches called sticky ends on each strand (Figure 11.1).
These are named so because they form hydrogen bonds with their
complementary cut counterparts. This stickiness of the ends facilitates
the action of the enzyme DNA ligase.
    Restriction endonucleases are used in genetic engineering to form
‘recombinant’ molecules of DNA, which are composed of DNA from
different sources/genomes.
    When cut by the same restriction enzyme, the resultant DNA fragments
have the same kind of ‘sticky-ends’ and, these can be joined together
(end-to-end) using DNA ligases (Figure 11.2).




                                                                              197




Figure 11.2 Diagrammatic representation of recombinant DNA technology
                                                                                       BIOLOGY


                        You may have realised that normally, unless one cuts the vector and
                    the source DNA with the same restriction enzyme, the recombinant vector
                    molecule cannot be created.
                    Separation and isolation of DNA fragments : The cutting of DNA by
                    restriction endonucleases results in the fragments of DNA. These fragments
                    can be separated by a technique known as gel electrophoresis. Since
                    DNA fragments are negatively charged molecules they can be separated
                    by forcing them to move towards the anode under an electric field through
                    a medium/matrix. Nowadays the most commonly used matrix is agarose
                    which is a natural polymer extracted from sea weeds. The DNA fragments
                    separate (resolve) according to their size through sieving effect provided
                    by the agarose gel. Hence, the smaller the fragment size, the farther it
                    moves. Look at the Figure 11.3 and guess at which end of the gel the
                    sample was loaded.
                                                          The separated DNA fragments can be
                                                          visualised only after staining the DNA
                                                          with a compound known as ethidium
                                                          bromide followed by exposure to UV
                                                          radiation (you cannot see pure DNA
                                                          fragments in the visible light and
                                                          without staining). You can see bright
                                                          orange coloured bands of DNA in a
                                                          ethidium bromide stained gel
                                                          exposed to UV light (Figure 11.3). The
                                                          separated bands of DNA are cut out
  Figure 11.3 A typical agarose gel                       from the agarose gel and extracted
              electrophoresis showing                     from the gel piece. This step is known
              migration of undigested                     as elution. The DNA fragments
              (lane 1) and digested set of                purified in this way are used in
              DNA fragments (lane 2 to 4)
                                                          constructing recombinant DNA by
                                                          joining them with cloning vectors.

                     11.2.2 Cloning Vectors
                     You know that plasmids and bacteriophages have the ability to replicate
                     within bacterial cells independent of the control of chromosomal DNA.
                     Bacteriophages because of their high number per cell, have very high
                     copy numbers of their genome within the bacterial cells. Some plasmids
                     may have only one or two copies per cell whereas others may have
198                  15-100 copies per cell. Their numbers can go even higher. If we are able
                     to link an alien piece of DNA with bacteriophage or plasmid DNA, we can
                     multiply its numbers equal to the copy number of the plasmid or
                     bacteriophage. Vectors used at present, are engineered in such a way
                     that they help easy linking of foreign DNA and selection of recombinants
                     from non-recombinants.
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


     The following are the features that are required to facilitate cloning
into a vector.
   (i) Origin of replication (ori) : This is a sequence from where
       replication starts and any piece of DNA when linked to this sequence
       can be made to replicate within the host cells. This sequence is also
       responsible for controlling the copy number of the linked DNA. So,
       if one wants to recover many copies of the target DNA it should be
       cloned in a vector whose origin support high copy number.
  (ii) Selectable marker : In addition to ‘ori’, the vector requires a
       selectable marker, which helps in identifying and eliminating non-
       transformants and selectively permitting the growth of the
       transformants. Transformation is a procedure through which a
       piece of DNA is introduced in a host bacterium (you will study the
       process in subsequent section). Normally, the genes encoding
       resistance to antibiotics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol,
       tetracycline or kanamycin, etc., are considered useful selectable
       markers for E. coli. The normal E. coli cells do not carry resistance
       against any of these antibiotics.
 (iii) Cloning sites: In order to link the
       alien DNA, the vector needs to have
       very few, preferably single,
       recognition sites for the commonly
       used restriction enzymes. Presence of
       more than one recognition sites within
       the vector will generate several
       fragments, which will complicate the
       gene cloning (Figure 11.4). The
       ligation of alien DNA is carried out at
       a restriction site present in one of the
       two antibiotic resistance genes. For
       example, you can ligate a foreign DNA
                                                      Figure 11.4 E. coli cloning vector pBR322
       at the BamH I site of tetracycline                           showing restriction sites
       resistance gene in the vector pBR322.                        (Hind III, EcoR I, BamH I, Sal I,
       The recombinant plasmids will lose                           Pvu II, Pst I, Cla I), ori and
       tetracycline resistance due to insertion                     antibiotic resistance genes
                                                                    (ampR and tetR). rop codes for
       of foreign DNA but can still be selected
                                                                    the proteins involved in the
       out from non-recombinant ones by                             replication of the plasmid.
       plating the transformants on ampicillin
       containing medium. The transformants growing on ampicillin
                                                                                                199
       containing medium are then transferred on a medium containing
       tetracycline. The recombinants will grow in ampicillin containing
       medium but not on that containing tetracycline. But, non-
       recombinants will grow on the medium containing both the
       antibiotics. In this case, one antibiotic resistance gene helps in
       selecting the transformants, whereas the other antibiotic resistance
                                                                              BIOLOGY


            gene gets ‘inactivated due to insertion’ of alien DNA, and helps in
            selection of recombinants.
               Selection of recombinants due to inactivation of antibiotics is a
            cumbersome procedure because it requires simultaneous plating
            on two plates having different antibiotics. Therefore, alternative
            selectable markers have been developed which differentiate
            recombinants from non-recombinants on the basis of their ability
            to produce colour in the presence of a chromogenic substrate. In
            this, a recombinant DNA is inserted within the coding sequence of
            an enzyme, β-galactosidase. This results into inactivation of the
            enzyme, which is referred to as insertional inactivation. The
            presence of a chromogenic substrate gives blue coloured colonies if
            the plasmid in the bacteria does not have an insert. Presence of
            insert results into insertional inactivation of the β-galactosidase and
            the colonies do not produce any colour, these are identified as
            recombinant colonies.
       (iv) Vectors for cloning genes in plants and animals : You may be
            surprised to know that we have learnt the lesson of transferring genes
            into plants and animals from bacteria and viruses which have known
            this for ages – how to deliver genes to transform eukaryotic cells and
            force them to do what the bacteria or viruses want. For example,
            Agrobacterium tumifaciens, a pathogen of several dicot plants is able
            to deliver a piece of DNA known as ‘T-DNA’ to transform normal
            plant cells into a tumor and direct these tumor cells to produce the
            chemicals required by the pathogen. Similarly, retroviruses in animals
            have the ability to transform normal cells into cancerous cells. A
            better understanding of the art of delivering genes by pathogens in
            their eukaryotic hosts has generated knowledge to transform these
            tools of pathogens into useful vectors for delivering genes of interest
            to humans. The tumor inducing (Ti) plasmid of Agrobacterium
            tumifaciens has now been modified into a cloning vector which is no
            more pathogenic to the plants but is still able to use the mechanisms
            to deliver genes of our interest into a variety of plants. Similarly,
            retroviruses have also been disarmed and are now used to deliver
            desirable genes into animal cells. So, once a gene or a DNA fragment
            has been ligated into a suitable vector it is transferred into a bacterial,
            plant or animal host (where it multiplies).

      11.2.3 Competent Host (For Transformation with
200          Recombinant DNA)
      Since DNA is a hydrophilic molecule, it cannot pass through cell
      membranes. Why? In order to force bacteria to take up the plasmid, the
      bacterial cells must first be made ‘competent’ to take up DNA. This is
      done by treating them with a specific concentration of a divalent cation,
      such as calcium, which increases the efficiency with which DNA enters
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


the bacterium through pores in its cell wall. Recombinant DNA can then
be forced into such cells by incubating the cells with recombinant DNA
on ice, followed by placing them briefly at 420C (heat shock), and then
putting them back on ice. This enables the bacteria to take up the
recombinant DNA.
    This is not the only way to introduce alien DNA into host cells. In a
method known as micro-injection, recombinant DNA is directly injected
into the nucleus of an animal cell. In another method, suitable for plants,
cells are bombarded with high velocity micro-particles of gold or tungsten
coated with DNA in a method known as biolistics or gene gun. And the
last method uses ‘disarmed pathogen’ vectors, which when allowed to
infect the cell, transfer the recombinant DNA into the host.
    Now that we have learnt about the tools for constructing recombinant
DNA, let us discuss the processes facilitating recombinant DNA technology.

11.3 PROCESSES OF RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY
Recombinant DNA technology involves several steps in specific
sequence such as isolation of DNA, fragmentation of DNA by
restriction endonucleases, isolation of a desired DNA fragment,
ligation of the DNA fragment into a vector, transferring the
recombinant DNA into the host, culturing the host cells in a
medium at large scale and extraction of the desired product.
Let us examine each of these steps in some details.

11.3.1 Isolation of the Genetic Material (DNA)
Recall that nucleic acid is the genetic material of all organisms
without exception. In majority of organisms this is
deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA. In order to cut the DNA with
restriction enzymes, it needs to be in pure form, free from other
macro-molecules. Since the DNA is enclosed within the
membranes, we have to break the cell open to release DNA along
with other macromolecules such as RNA, proteins,
polysaccharides and also lipids. This can be achieved by treating
the bacterial cells/plant or animal tissue with enzymes such as         Figure 11.5 DNA that
                                                                         separates out can be
lysozyme (bacteria), cellulase (plant cells), chitinase (fungus).
                                                                         removed by spooling
You know that genes are located on long molecules of DNA
interwined with proteins such as histones. The RNA can be removed by                        201
treatment with ribonuclease whereas proteins can be removed by
treatment with protease. Other molecules can be removed by appropriate
treatments and purified DNA ultimately precipitates out after the addition
of chilled ethanol. This can be seen as collection of fine threads in the
suspension (Figure 11.5).
                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                      11.3.2 Cutting of DNA at Specific Locations
                      Restriction enzyme digestions are performed by incubating purified DNA
                      molecules with the restriction enzyme, at the optimal conditions for that
                      specific enzyme. Agarose gel electrophoresis is employed to check the
                      progression of a restriction enzyme digestion. DNA is a negatively charged
                      molecule, hence it moves towards the positive electrode (anode)
                      (Figure 11.3). The process is repeated with the vector DNA also.
                          The joining of DNA involves several processes. After having cut the
                      source DNA as well as the vector DNA with a specific restriction enzyme,
                      the cut out ‘gene of interest’ from the source DNA and the cut vector with
                      space are mixed and ligase is added. This results in the preparation of
                      recombinant DNA.

                      11.3.3 Amplification of Gene of Interest using PCR
                      PCR stands for Polymerase Chain Reaction. In this reaction, multiple
                      copies of the gene (or DNA) of interest is synthesised in vitro using two




202



Figure 11.6   Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) : Each cycle has three steps: (i) Denaturation;
              (ii) Primer annealing; and (iii) Extension of primers
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


sets of primers (small chemically synthesised oligonucleotides that are
complementary to the regions of DNA) and the enzyme DNA polymerase.
The enzyme extends the primers using the nucleotides provided in the
reaction and the genomic DNA as template. If the process of replication
of DNA is repeated many times, the segment of DNA can be amplified
to approximately billion times, i.e., 1 billion copies are made. Such
repeated amplification is achieved by the use of a thermostable DNA
polymerase (isolated from a bacterium, Thermus aquaticus), which
remain active during the high temperature induced denaturation of
double stranded DNA. The amplified fragment if desired can now be
used to ligate with a vector for further cloning (Figure11.6).

11.3.4 Insertion of Recombinant DNA into the Host
       Cell/Organism
There are several methods of introducing the ligated DNA into recipient
cells. Recipient cells after making them ‘competent’ to receive, take up
DNA present in its surrounding. So, if a recombinant DNA bearing gene
for resistance to an antibiotic (e.g., ampicillin) is transferred into E. coli
cells, the host cells become transformed into ampicillin-resistant cells. If
we spread the transformed cells on agar plates containing ampicillin, only
transformants will grow, untransformed recipient cells will die. Since, due
to ampicillin resistance gene, one is able to select a transformed cell in the
presence of ampicillin. The ampicillin resistance gene in this case is called
a selectable marker.

11.3.5 Obtaining the Foreign Gene Product
When you insert a piece of alien DNA into a cloning vector and transfer it
into a bacterial, plant or animal cell, the alien DNA gets multiplied. In
almost all recombinant technologies, the ultimate aim is to produce a
desirable protein. Hence, there is a need for the recombinant DNA to be
expressed. The foreign gene gets expressed under appropriate conditions.
The expression of foreign genes in host cells involve understanding many
technical details.
    After having cloned the gene of interest and having optimised the
conditions to induce the expression of the target protein, one has to
consider producing it on a large scale. Can you think of any reason
why there is a need for large-scale production? If any protein encoding
gene is expressed in a heterologous host, it is called a recombinant
protein. The cells harbouring cloned genes of interest may be grown
on a small scale in the laboratory. The cultures may be used for                 203
extracting the desired protein and then purifying it by using different
separation techniques.
    The cells can also be multiplied in a continuous culture system wherein
the used medium is drained out from one side while fresh medium is
added from the other to maintain the cells in their physiologically most
                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                         active log/exponential phase. This type of culturing method produces a
                         larger biomass leading to higher yields of desired protein.
                             Small volume cultures cannot yield appreciable quantities of products.
                         To produce in large quantities, the development of bioreactors, where
                         large volumes (100-1000 litres) of culture can be processed, was required.
                         Thus, bioreactors can be thought of as vessels in which raw materials are
                         biologically converted into specific products, individual enzymes, etc.,
                         using microbial plant, animal or human cells. A bioreactor provides the
                         optimal conditions for achieving the desired product by providing
                         optimum growth conditions (temperature, pH, substrate, salts, vitamins,
                         oxygen).
                             The most commonly used bioreactors are of stirring type, which are
                         shown in Figure 11.7.




                   (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 11.7   (a) Simple stirred-tank bioreactor; (b) Sparged stirred-tank bioreactor through which
              sterile air bubbles are sparged


                             A stirred-tank reactor is usually cylindrical or with a curved base to
                         facilitate the mixing of the reactor contents. The stirrer facilitates even
                         mixing and oxygen availability throughout the bioreactor. Alternatively
                         air can be bubbled through the reactor. If you look at the figure closely
                         you will see that the bioreactor has an agitator system, an oxygen delivery
                         system and a foam control system, a temperature control system, pH
204                      control system and sampling ports so that small volumes of the culture
                         can be withdrawn periodically.

                         11.3.6 Downstream Processing
                         After completion of the biosynthetic stage, the product has to be subjected
                         through a series of processes before it is ready for marketing as a finished
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES


product. The processes include separation and purification, which are
collectively referred to as downstream processing. The product has to be
formulated with suitable preservatives. Such formulation has to undergo
thorough clinical trials as in case of drugs. Strict quality control testing
for each product is also required. The downstream processing and quality
control testing vary from product to product.




                                 SUMMARY
      Biotechnology deals with large scale production and marketing of
      products and processes using live organisms, cells or enzymes.
      Modern biotechnology using genetically modified organisms was
      made possible only when man learnt to alter the chemistry of DNA
      and construct recombinant DNA. This key process is called
      recombinant DNA technology or genetic engineering. This process
      involves the use of restriction endonucleases, DNA ligase,
      appropriate plasmid or viral vectors to isolate and ferry the foreign
      DNA into host organisms, expression of the foreign gene, purification
      of the gene product, i.e., the functional protein and finally making a
      suitable formulation for marketing. Large scale production involves
      use of bioreactors.




                        EXERCISES
 1.   Can you list 10 recombinant proteins which are used in medical
      practice? Find out where they are used as therapeutics (use the internet).
 2.   Make a chart (with diagrammatic representation) showing a restriction
      enzyme, the substrate DNA on which it acts, the site at which it cuts
      DNA and the product it produces.
 3.   From what you have learnt, can you tell whether enzymes are bigger or
      DNA is bigger in molecular size? How did you know?
 4.   What would be the molar concentration of human DNA in a human
      cell? Consult your teacher.
 5.   Do eukaryotic cells have restriction endonucleases? Justify your answer.
 6.   Besides better aeration and mixing properties, what other advantages
      do stirred tank bioreactors have over shake flasks?
 7.   Collect 5 examples of palindromic DNA sequences by consulting your teacher.   205
      Better try to create a palindromic sequence by following base-pair rules.
 8.   Can you recall meiosis and indicate at what stage a recombinant DNA
      is made?
 9.   Can you think and answer how a reporter enzyme can be used to monitor
      transformation of host cells by foreign DNA in addition to a selectable
      marker?
                                                                     BIOLOGY


      10. Describe briefly the following:
          (a) Origin of replication
          (b) Bioreactors
          (c) Downstream processing
      11. Explain briefly
          (a) PCR
          (b) Restriction enzymes and DNA
          (c) Chitinase
      12. Discuss with your teacher and find out how to distinguish between
          (a) Plasmid DNA and Chromosomal DNA
          (b) RNA and DNA
          (c) Exonuclease and Endonuclease




206
CHAPTER 15

BIODIVERSITY AND
CONSERVATION

 15.1 Biodiversity

 15.2 Biodiversity Conservation   If an alien from a distant galaxy were to visit our planet
                                  Earth, the first thing that would amaze and baffle him
                                  would most probably be the enormous diversity of life
                                  that he would encounter. Even for humans, the rich variety
                                  of living organisms with which they share this planet never
                                  ceases to astonish and fascinate us. The common man
                                  would find it hard to believe that there are more than
                                  20,000 species of ants, 3,00,000 species of beetles, 28,000
                                  species of fishes and nearly 20,000 species of orchids.
                                  Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have been trying
                                  to understand the significance of such diversity by asking
                                  important questions– Why are there so many species?
                                  Did such great diversity exist throughout earth’s history?
                                  How did this diversification come about? How and why
                                  is this diversity important to the biosphere? Would it
                                  function any differently if the diversity was much less?
                                  How do humans benefit from the diversity of life?

                                  15.1 BIODIVERSITY
                                  In our biosphere immense diversity (or heterogeneity)
                                  exists not only at the species level but at all levels of
                                  biological organisation ranging from macromolecules
                                  within cells to biomes. Biodiversity is the term popularised
                                  by the sociobiologist Edward Wilson to describe the




                                                                                      2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


combined diversity at all the levels of biological organisation.
The most important of them are–
  (i) Genetic diversity : A single species might show high diversity at
      the genetic level over its distributional range. The genetic variation
      shown by the medicinal plant Rauwolfia vomitoria growing in
      different Himalayan ranges might be in terms of the potency and
      concentration of the active chemical (reserpine) that the plant
      produces. India has more than 50,000 genetically different strains
      of rice, and 1,000 varieties of mango.
 (ii) Species diversity : The diversity at the species level. For example,
      the Western Ghats have a greater amphibian species diversity than
      the Eastern Ghats.
 (iii) Ecological diversity : At the ecosystem level, India, for instance,
       with its deserts, rain forests, mangroves, coral reefs, wetlands,
       estuaries, and alpine meadows has a greater ecosystem diversity
       than a Scandinavian country like Norway.
     It has taken millions of years of evolution, to accumulate this rich
diversity in nature, but we could lose all that wealth in less than two
centuries if the present rates of species losses continue. Biodiversity and
its conservation are now vital environmental issues of international concern
as more and more people around the world begin to realise the critical
importance of biodiversity for our survival and well- being on this planet.

15.1.1 How Many Species are there on Earth and How Many
       in India?
Since there are published records of all the species discovered and named,
we know how many species in all have been recorded so far, but it is not
easy to answer the question of how many species there are on earth.
According to the IUCN (2004), the total number of plant and animal species
described so far is slightly more than 1.5 million, but we have no clear
idea of how many species are yet to be discovered and described. Estimates
vary widely and many of them are only educated guesses. For many
taxonomic groups, species inventories are more complete in temperate
than in tropical countries. Considering that an overwhelmingly large
proportion of the species waiting to be discovered are in the tropics,
biologists make a statistical comparison of the temperate-tropical species
richness of an exhaustively studied group of insects and extrapolate this      259
ratio to other groups of animals and plants to come up with a gross
estimate of the total number of species on earth. Some extreme estimates
range from 20 to 50 million, but a more conservative and scientifically
sound estimate made by Robert May places the global species diversity
at about 7 million.




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY


           Let us look at some interesting aspects about earth’s biodiversity based
      on the currently available species inventories. More than 70 per cent of
      all the species recorded are animals, while plants (including algae, fungi,
      bryophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms) comprise no more than 22
      per cent of the total. Among animals, insects are the most species-rich
      taxonomic group, making up more than 70 per cent of the total. That
      means, out of every 10 animals on this planet, 7 are insects. Again, how
      do we explain this enormous diversification of insects? The number of
      fungi species in the world is more than the combined total of the species
      of fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. In Figure 15.1, biodiversity
      is depicted showing species number of major taxa.




      Figure 15.1 Representing global biodiversity: proportionate number of
                  species of major taxa of plants, invertebrates and vertebrates


260       It should be noted that these estimates do not give any figures for
      prokaryotes. Biologists are not sure about how many prokaryotic species
      there might be. The problem is that conventional taxonomic methods are
      not suitable for identifying microbial species and many species are simply
      not culturable under laboratory conditions. If we accept biochemical or
      molecular criteria for delineating species for this group, then their diversity
      alone might run into millions.




                                                                             2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


    Although India has only 2.4 per cent of the world’s land area, its share
of the global species diversity is an impressive 8.1 per cent. That is what
makes our country one of the 12 mega diversity countries of the world.
Nearly 45,000 species of plants and twice as many of animals have been
recorded from India. How many living species are actually there waiting
to be discovered and named? If we accept May’s global estimates, only
22 per cent of the total species have been recorded so far. Applying this
proportion to India’s diversity figures, we estimate that there are probably
more than 1,00,000 plant species and more than 3,00, 000 animal species
yet to be discovered and described. Would we ever be able to complete
the inventory of the biological wealth of our country? Consider the immense
trained manpower (taxonomists) and the time required to complete the
job. The situation appears more hopeless when we realise that a large
fraction of these species faces the threat of becoming extinct even before
we discover them. Nature’s biological library is burning even before we
catalogued the titles of all the books stocked there.

15.1.2 Patterns of Biodiversity
  (i) Latitudinal gradients : The diversity of plants and animals is
      not uniform throughout the world but shows a rather uneven
      distribution. For many group of animals or plants, there are
      interesting patterns in diversity, the most well- known being the
      latitudinal gradient in diversity. In general, species diversity
      decreases as we move away from the equator towards the poles.
      With very few exceptions, tropics (latitudinal range of 23.5° N to
      23.5° S) harbour more species than temperate or polar areas.
      Colombia located near the equator has nearly 1,400 species of birds
      while New York at 41° N has 105 species and Greenland at 71° N
      only 56 species. India, with much of its land area in the tropical
      latitudes, has more than 1,200 species of birds. A forest in a tropical
      region like Equador has up to 10 times as many species of vascular
      plants as a forest of equal area in a temperate region like the Midwest
      of the USA. The largely tropical Amazonian rain forest in South
      America has the greatest biodiversity on earth- it is home to more
      than 40,000 species of plants, 3,000 of fishes, 1,300 of birds, 427
      of mammals, 427 of amphibians, 378 of reptiles and of more than
      1,25,000 invertebrates. Scientists estimate that in these rain forests
      there might be at least two million insect species waiting to be
      discovered and named.
      What is so special about tropics that might account for their greater
                                                                                261
      biological diversity? Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have
      proposed various hypotheses; some important ones are (a) Speciation
      is generally a function of time, unlike temperate regions subjected
      to frequent glaciations in the past, tropical latitudes have remained
      relatively undisturbed for millions of years and thus, had a long




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                             evolutionary time for species diversification, (b) Tropical environments,
                             unlike temperate ones, are less seasonal, relatively more constant
                             and predictable. Such constant environments promote niche
                             specialisation and lead to a greater species diversity and (c) There
                             is more solar energy available in the tropics, which contributes to
                             higher productivity; this in turn might contribute indirectly to greater
                             diversity.
                        (ii) Species-Area relationships : During his pioneering and extensive
                             explorations in the wilderness of South American jungles, the great
                             German naturalist and geographer Alexander von Humboldt
                                                           observed that within a region species
                                                           richness increased with increasing
                                                           explored area, but only up to a limit. In
                                                           fact, the relation between species richness
                                                           and area for a wide variety of taxa
                                                           (angiosperm plants, birds, bats,
                                                           freshwater fishes) turns out to be a
                                                           rectangular hyperbola (Figure15.2). On
                                                           a logarithmic scale, the relationship is a
                                                           straight line described by the equation
                                                               log S = log C + Z log A
                                                               where
                                                               S= Species richness A= Area
                                                               Z = slope of the line (regression
                                                                   coefficient)
                                                               C = Y-intercept
                                                               Ecologists have discovered that the
 Figure 15.2 Showing species area relationship.
                                                           value of Z lies in the range of 0.1 to 0.2,
             Note that on log scale the relationship
             becomes linear                                regardless of the taxonomic group or the
                                                           region (whether it is the plants in Britain,
                      birds in California or molluscs in New York state, the slopes of the regression
                      line are amazingly similar). But, if you analyse the species-area
                      relationships among very large areas like the entire continents, you will
                      find that the slope of the line to be much steeper (Z values in the range
                      of 0.6 to 1.2). For example, for frugivorous (fruit-eating) birds and
                      mammals in the tropical forests of different continents, the slope is found
                      to be 1.15. What do steeper slopes mean in this context?

262                     15.1.3 The importance of Species Diversity to the Ecosystem
                        Does the number of species in a community really matter to the functioning
                        of the ecosystem?This is a question for which ecologists have not been
                        able to give a definitive answer. For many decades, ecologists believed
                        that communities with more species, generally, tend to be more stable
                        than those with less species. What exactly is stability for a biological




                                                                                               2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


community? A stable community should not show too much variation
in productivity from year to year; it must be either resistant or resilient to
occasional disturbances (natural or man-made), and it must also be
resistant to invasions by alien species. We don’t know how these attributes
are linked to species richness in a community, but David Tilman’s
long-term ecosystem experiments using outdoor plots provide some
tentative answers. Tilman found that plots with more species showed
less year-to-year variation in total biomass. He also showed that in his
experiments, increased diversity contributed to higher productivity.
    Although, we may not understand completely how species richness
contributes to the well-being of an ecosystem, we know enough to realise
that rich biodiversity is not only essential for ecosystem health but
imperative for the very survival of the human race on this planet. At a
time when we are losing species at an alarming pace, one might ask–
Does it really matter to us if a few species become extinct? Would Western
Ghats ecosystems be less functional if one of its tree frog species is lost
forever? How is our quality of life affected if, say, instead of 20,000 we
have only 15,000 species of ants on earth?
    There are no direct answers to such näive questions but we can develop
a proper perspective through an analogy (the ‘rivet popper hypothesis’)
used by Stanford ecologist Paul Ehrlich. In an airplane (ecosystem) all
parts are joined together using thousands of rivets (species). If every
passenger travelling in it starts popping a rivet to take home (causing a
species to become extinct), it may not affect flight safety (proper functioning
of the ecosystem) initially, but as more and more rivets are removed, the
plane becomes dangerously weak over a period of time. Furthermore,
which rivet is removed may also be critical. Loss of rivets on the wings
(key species that drive major ecosystem functions) is obviously a more
serious threat to flight safety than loss of a few rivets on the seats or
windows inside the plane.

15.1.4 Loss of Biodiversity
While it is doubtful if any new species are being added (through speciation)
into the earth’s treasury of species, there is no doubt about their continuing
losses. The biological wealth of our planet has been declining rapidly
and the accusing finger is clearly pointing to human activities. The
colonisation of tropical Pacific Islands by humans is said to have led to
the extinction of more than 2,000 species of native birds. The IUCN Red
List (2004) documents the extinction of 784 species (including 338                263
vertebrates, 359 invertebrates and 87 plants) in the last 500 years. Some
examples of recent extinctions include the dodo (Mauritius), quagga
(Africa), thylacine (Australia), Steller’s Sea Cow (Russia) and three
subspecies (Bali, Javan, Caspian) of tiger. The last twenty years alone
have witnessed the disappearance of 27 species. Careful analysis of records




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY


      shows that extinctions across taxa are not random; some groups like
      amphibians appear to be more vulnerable to extinction. Adding to the
      grim scenario of extinctions is the fact that more than 15,500 species
      world-wide are facing the threat of extinction. Presently, 12 per cent of
      all bird species, 23 per cent of all mammal species, 32 per cent of all
      amphibian species and 31per cent of all gymnosperm species in the world
      face the threat of extinction.
           From a study of the history of life on earth through fossil records, we
      learn that large-scale loss of species like the one we are currently
      witnessing have also happened earlier, even before humans appeared on
      the scene. During the long period (> 3 billion years) since the origin and
      diversification of life on earth there were five episodes of mass extinction
      of species. How is the ‘Sixth Extinction’ presently in progress different
      from the previous episodes? The difference is in the rates; the current
      species extinction rates are estimated to be 100 to 1,000 times faster
      than in the pre-human times and our activities are responsible for the
      faster rates. Ecologists warn that if the present trends continue,
      nearly half of all the species on earth might be wiped out within the next
      100 years.
           In general, loss of biodiversity in a region may lead to (a) decline in
      plant production, (b) lowered resistance to environmental perturbations
      such as drought and (c) increased variability in certain ecosystem processes
      such as plant productivity, water use, and pest and disease cycles.
      Causes of biodiversity losses: The accelerated rates of species
      extinctions that the world is facing now are largely due to human
      activities. There are four major causes (‘ The Evil Quartet ’ is the sobriquet
      used to describe them).
         (i) Habitat loss and fragmentation: This is the most important
             cause driving animals and plants to extinction. The most dramatic
             examples of habitat loss come from tropical rain forests. Once
             covering more than 14 per cent of the earth’s land surface, these
             rain forests now cover no more than 6 per cent. They are being
             destroyed fast. By the time you finish reading this chapter, 1000
             more hectares of rain forest would have been lost. The Amazon
             rain forest (it is so huge that it is called the ‘lungs of the planet’)
             harbouring probably millions of species is being cut and cleared
             for cultivating soya beans or for conversion to grasslands for raising
             beef cattle. Besides total loss, the degradation of many habitats by
264          pollution also threatens the survival of many species. When large
             habitats are broken up into small fragments due to various human
             activities, mammals and birds requiring large territories and certain
             animals with migratory habits are badly affected, leading to
             population declines.
        (ii) Over-exploitation: Humans have always depended on nature for
             food and shelter, but when ‘need’ turns to ‘greed’, it leads to




                                                                            2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


       over -exploitation of natural resources. Many species extinctions
       in the last 500 years (Steller’s sea cow, passenger pigeon) were due
       to overexploitation by humans. Presently many marine fish
       populations around the world are over harvested, endangering the
       continued existence of some commercially important species.
 (iii) Alien species invasions: When alien species are introduced
       unintentionally or deliberately for whatever purpose, some of them
       turn invasive, and cause decline or extinction of indigenous species.
       The Nile perch introduced into Lake Victoria in east Africa led
       eventually to the extinction of an ecologically unique assemblage of
       more than 200 species of cichlid fish in the lake. You must be
       familiar with the environmental damage caused and threat posed
       to our native species by invasive weed species like carrot grass
       (Parthenium), Lantana and water hyacinth (Eicchornia). The recent
       illegal introduction of the African catfish Clarias gariepinus for
       aquaculture purposes is posing a threat to the indigenous catfishes
       in our rivers.
 (iv) Co-extinctions: When a species becomes extinct, the plant and
       animal species associated with it in an obligatory way also become
       extinct. When a host fish species becomes extinct, its unique
       assemblage of parasites also meets the same fate. Another example
       is the case of a coevolved plant-pollinator mutualism where
       extinction of one invariably leads to the extinction of the other.

15.2 BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION
15.2.1 Why Should We Conserve Biodiversity?
There are many reasons, some obvious and others not so obvious, but all
equally important. They can be grouped into three categories: narrowly
utilitarian, broadly utilitarian, and ethical.
    The narrowly utilitarian arguments for conserving biodiversity are
obvious; humans derive countless direct economic benefits from nature-
food (cereals, pulses, fruits), firewood, fibre, construction material,
industrial products (tannins, lubricants, dyes, resins, perfumes ) and
products of medicinal importance. More than 25 per cent of the drugs
currently sold in the market worldwide are derived from plants and 25,000
species of plants contribute to the traditional medicines used by native
peoples around the world. Nobody knows how many more medicinally
useful plants there are in tropical rain forests waiting to be explored.       265
With increasing resources put into ‘bioprospecting’ (exploring molecular,
genetic and species-level diversity for products of economic importance),
nations endowed with rich biodiversity can expect to reap enormous
benefits.
    The broadly utilitarian argument says that biodiversity plays a
major role in many ecosystem services that nature provides. The fast-




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY


      dwindling Amazon forest is estimated to produce, through
      photosynthesis, 20 per cent of the total oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.
      Can we put an economic value on this service by nature? You can get
      some idea by finding out how much your neighborhood hospital spends
      on a cylinder of oxygen. Pollination (without which plants cannot give
      us fruits or seeds) is another service, ecosystems provide through
      pollinators layer – bees, bumblebees, birds and bats. What will be the
      costs of accomplishing pollination without help from natural
      pollinators? There are other intangible benefits – that we derive from
      nature–the aesthetic pleasures of walking through thick woods, watching
      spring flowers in full bloom or waking up to a bulbul’s song in the
      morning. Can we put a price tag on such things?
          The ethical argument for conserving biodiversity relates to what we
      owe to millions of plant, animal and microbe species with whom we share
      this planet. Philosophically or spiritually, we need to realise that every
      species has an intrinsic value, even if it may not be of current or any
      economic value to us. We have a moral duty to care for their well-being
      and pass on our biological legacy in good order to future generations.

      15.2.2 How do we conserve Biodiversity?
      When we conserve and protect the whole ecosystem, its biodiversity at all
      levels is protected - we save the entire forest to save the tiger. This approach
      is called in situ (on site) conservation. However, when there are situations
      where an animal or plant is endangered or threatened (Please see Page
      290 also) and needs urgent measures to save it from extinction, ex situ
      (off site) conservation is the desirable approach.
      In situ conservation– Faced with the conflict between development and
      conservation, many nations find it unrealistic and economically not feasible
      to conserve all their biological wealth. Invariably, the number of species
      waiting to be saved from extinction far exceeds the conservation resources
      available. On a global basis, this problem has been addressed by eminent
      conservationists. They identified for maximum protection certain
      ‘biodiversity hotspots’ regions with very high levels of species richness
      and high degree of endemism (that is, species confined to that region
      and not found anywhere else). Initially 25 biodiversity hotspots were
      identified but subsequently nine more have been added to the list,
      bringing the total number of biodiversity hotspots in the world to 34.
      These hotspots are also regions of accelerated habitat loss. Three of
266   these hotspots – Western Ghats and Sri Lanka, Indo-Burma and
      Himalaya – cover our country’s exceptionally high biodiversity regions.
      Although all the biodiversity hotspots put together cover less than 2
      percent of the earth’s land area, the number of species they collectively
      harbour is extremely high and strict protection of these hotspots could
      reduce the ongoing mass extinctions by almost 30 per cent.




                                                                              2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


    In India, ecologically unique and biodiversity-rich regions are legally
protected as biosphere reserves, national parks and sanctuaries. India
now has 14 biosphere reserves, 90 national parks and 448 wildlife
sanctuaries. India has also a history of religious and cultural traditions
that emphasised protection of nature. In many cultures, tracts of forest
were set aside, and all the trees and wildlife within were venerated and
given total protection. Such sacred groves are found in Khasi and Jaintia
Hills in Meghalaya, Aravalli Hills of Rajasthan, Western Ghat regions of
Karnataka and Maharashtra and the Sarguja, Chanda and Bastar areas
of Madhya Pradesh. In Meghalaya, the sacred groves are the last refuges
for a large number of rare and threatened plants.
Ex situ Conservation– In this approach, threatened animals and plants
are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting
where they can be protected and given special care. Zoological parks,
botanical gardens and wildlife safari parks serve this purpose. There are
many animals that have become extinct in the wild but continue to be
maintained in zoological parks. In recent years ex situ conservation has
advanced beyond keeping threatened species in enclosures. Now gametes
of threatened species can be preserved in viable and fertile condition for
long periods using cryopreservation techniques, eggs can be fertilised in
vitro, and plants can be propagated using tissue culture methods. Seeds
of different genetic strains of commercially important plants can be kept
for long periods in seed banks.
    Biodiversity knows no political boundaries and its conservation is
therefore a collective responsibility of all nations. The historic Convention
on Biological Diversity (‘The Earth Summit’) held in Rio de Janeiro in
1992, called upon all nations to take appropriate measures for
conservation of biodiversity and sustainable utilisation of its benefits. In
a follow-up, the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in 2002
in Johannesburg, South Africa, 190 countries pledged their commitment
to achieve by 2010, a significant reduction in the current rate of biodiversity
loss at global, regional and local levels.



                                SUMMARY
   Since life originated on earth nearly 3.8 billion years ago, there had
   been enormous diversification of life forms on earth. Biodiversity refers
   to the sum total of diversity that exists at all levels of biological
   organisation. Of particular importance is the diversity at genetic, species    267
   and ecosystem levels and conservation efforts are aimed at protecting
   diversity at all these levels.
       More than 1.5 million species have been recorded in the world, but
   there might still be nearly 6 million species on earth waiting to be
   discovered and named. Of the named species, > 70 per cent are animals,
   of which 70 per cent are insects. The group Fungi has more species




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY



      than all the vertebrate species combined. India, with about 45,000
      species of plants and twice as many species of animals, is one of the 12
      mega diversity countries of the world.
           Species diversity on earth is not uniformly distributed but shows
      interesting patterns. It is generally highest in the tropics and decreases
      towards the poles. Important explanations for the species richness of
      the tropics are: Tropics had more evolutionary time; they provide a
      relatively constant environment and, they receive more solar energy
      which contributes to greater productivity. Species richness is also
      function of the area of a region; the species-area relationship is generally
      a rectangular hyperbolic function.
           It is believed that communities with high diversity tend to be less
      variable, more productive and more resistant to biological invasions.
      Earth’s fossil history reveals incidence of mass extinctions in the past,
      but the present rates of extinction, largely attributed to human activities,
      are 100 to 1000 times higher. Nearly 700 species have become extinct
      in recent times and more than 15,500 species (of which > 650 are from
      India) currently face the threat of extinction. The causes of high
      extinction rates at present include habitat (particularly forests) loss
      and fragmentation, over -exploitation, biological invasions and
      co- extinctions.
           Earth’s rich biodiversity is vital for the very survival of mankind.
      The reasons for conserving biodiversity are narrowly utilitarian, broadly
      utilitarian and ethical. Besides the direct benefits (food, fibre, firewood,
      pharmaceuticals, etc.), there are many indirect benefits we receive
      through ecosystem services such as pollination, pest control, climate
      moderation and flood control. We also have a moral responsibility to
      take good care of earth’s biodiversity and pass it on in good order to our
      next generation.
           Biodiversity conservation may be in situ as well as ex situ. In in situ
      conservation, the endangered species are protected in their natural
      habitat so that the entire ecosystem is protected. Recently, 34
      ‘biodiversity hotspots’ in the world have been proposed for intensive
      conservation efforts. Of these, three (Western Ghats-Sri Lanka,
      Himalaya and Indo-Burma) cover India’s rich biodiversity regions. Our
      country’s in situ conservation efforts are reflected in its 14 biosphere
      reserves, 90 national parks, > 450 wildlife sanctuaries and many sacred
      groves. Ex situ conservation methods include protective maintenance
      of threatened species in zoological parks and botanical gardens, in vitro
      fertilisation, tissue culture propagation and cryopreservation of
      gametes.




268
                            EXERCISES
      1.   Name the three important components of biodiversity.
      2.   How do ecologists estimate the total number of species present in the
           world?




                                                                             2017-18
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION


 3. Give three hypotheses for explaining why tropics show greatest levels
    of species richness.
 4. What is the significance of the slope of regression in a species – area
    relationship?
 5. What are the major causes of species losses in a geographical region?
 6. How is biodiversity important for ecosystem functioning?
 7. What are sacred groves? What is their role in conservation?
 8. Among the ecosystem services are control of floods and soil erosion.
    How is this achieved by the biotic components of the ecosystem?
 9. The species diversity of plants (22 per cent) is much less than that of
    animals (72 per cent). What could be the explanations to how animals
    achieved greater diversification?
10. Can you think of a situation where we deliberately want to make a
    species extinct? How would you justify it?




                                                                              269




                                                                              2017-18
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL



UNIT VI: CHAPTER 1; 1.1, PAGE 6            AT THE END OF FIRST PARA

Under unfavourable condition the Amoeba withdraws its pseudopodia
and secretes a three-layered hard covering or cyst around itself. This
phenomenon is termed as encystation. When favourable conditions
return, the encysted Amoeba divides by multiple fission and produces
many minute amoeba or pseudopodiospores; the cyst wall bursts out,
and the spores are liberated in the surrounding medium to grow up into
many amoebae. This phenomenon is known as sporulation.

UNIT VI: CHAPTER 1; 1.1, PAGE 7            AT THE END OF SECOND PARA

In some organisms, if the body breaks into distinct pieces (fragments)
each fragment grows into an adult capable of producing offspring (e.g.,
Hydra). This is also a mode of asexual reproduction called
fragmentation.

UNIT VII: CHAPTER 5; PAGE 85 (TO            BE GIVEN AS SECTION      5.4)
POLYGENIC INHERITANCE
Mendel’s studies mainly described those traits that have distinct alternate
forms such as flower colour which are either purple or white. But if you
look around you will find that there are many traits which are not so
distinct in their occurrence and are spread across a gradient. For example,
in humans we don’t just have tall or short people as two distinct
alternatives but a whole range of possible heights. Such traits are generally
controlled by three or more genes and are thus called as polygenic traits.




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY


      Besides the involvement of multiple genes polygenic inheritance also takes
      into account the influence of environment. Human skin colour is another
      classic example for this. In a polygenic trait the phenotype reflects the
      contribution of each allele, i.e., the effect of each allele is additive. To
      understand this better let us assume that three genes A, B, C control skin
      colour in human with the dominant forms A, B and C responsible for dark
      skin colour and the recessive forms a, b and c for light skin colour. The
      genotype with all the dominant alleles (AABBCC) will have the darkest skin
      colour and that with all the recessive alleles (aabbcc) will have the lightest
      skin colour. As expected the genotype with three dominant alleles and three
      recessive alleles will have an intermediate skin colour. In this manner the
      number of each type of alleles in the genotype would determine the darkness
      or lightness of the skin in an individual.

      UNIT VII: CHAPTER 5; PAGE 85 (TO            BE GIVEN AS SECTION       5.5)
      PLEIOTROPY
      We have so far seen the effect of a gene on a single phenotype or trait.
      There are however instances where a single gene can exhibit multiple
      phenotypic expression. Such a gene is called a pleiotropic gene. The
      underlying mechanism of pleiotropy in most cases is the effect of a gene
      on metabolic pathways which contributes towards different phenotypes.
      An example of this is the disease phenylketonuria, which occurs in
      humans. The disease is caused by mutation in the gene that codes for the
      enzyme phenyl alanine hydroxylase (single gene mutation). This manifests
      itself through phenotypic expression characterised by mental
      retardation and a reduction in hair and skin pigmentation.

      UNIT VII: CHAPTER 5; PAGE 86 (TO           BE GIVEN AS SECTION      5.6.2)
      SEX DETERMINATION   IN   HONEY BEE
      The sex determination in honey bee is based on the number of sets of
      chromosomes an individual receives. An offspring formed from the union
      of a sperm and an egg develops as a female (queen or worker), and an
      unfertilised egg develops as a male (drone) by means of parthenogenesis.
      This means that the males have half the number of chromosomes than that
      of a female. The females are diploid having 32 chromosomes and males are
      haploid, i.e., having 16 chromosomes. This is called as haplodiploid sex-
      determination system and has special characteristic features such as the
      males produce sperms by mitosis (Figure 5.13), they do not have father
      and thus cannot have sons, but have a grandfather and can have grandsons.



288




                       Fig.5.13 Sex determination in honey bee




                                                                            2017-18
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL


UNIT VII: CHAPTER 5; 5.8.2, PAGE 89             AFTER FIRST PARA

COLOUR BLINDNESS
It is a sex-linked recessive disorder due to defect in either red or green
cone of eye resulting in failure to discriminate between red and green
colour. This defect is due to mutation in certain genes present in the X
chromosome. It occurs in about 8 per cent of males and only about 0.4
per cent of females. This is because the genes that lead to red-green colour
blindness are on the X chromosome. Males have only one X chromosome
and females have two. The son of a woman who carries the gene has a 50
per cent chance of being colour blind. The mother is not herself colour
blind because the gene is recessive. That means that its effect is suppressed
by her matching dominant normal gene. A daughter will not normally be
colour blind, unless her mother is a carrier and her father is colour blind.

UNIT VII: CHAPTER 5; 5.8.2, PAGE 90             AFTER SECOND PARA

THALASSEMIA
This is also an autosome -linked recessive blood disease transmitted from
parents to the offspring when both the partners are unaffected carrier for
the gene (or heterozygous). The defect could be due to either mutation or
deletion which ultimately results in reduced rate of synthesis of one of the
globin chains (á and â chains) that make up haemoglobin. This causes the
formation of abnormal haemoglobin molecules resulting into anaemia which
is characteristic of the disease. Thalassemia can be classified according to
which chain of the haemoglobin molecule is affected. In á Thalassemia,
production of á globin chain is affected while in â Thalassemia, production
of â globin chain is affected. á Thalassemia is controlled by two closely
linked genes HBA1 and HBA2 on chromosome 16 of each parent and it is
observed due to mutation or deletion of one or more of the four genes. The
more genes affected, the less alpha globin molecules produced. While â
Thalassemia is controlled by a single gene HBB on chromosome 11 of each
parent and occurs due to mutation of one or both the genes. Thalassemia
differs from sickle-cell anaemia in that the former is a quantitative problem
of synthesising too few globin molecules while the latter is a qualitative
problem of synthesising an incorrectly functioning globin.

UNIT VII: CHAPTER 7; 7.3, PAGE 129             AFTER SECOND PARA

Embryological support for evolution was also proposed by Ernst Heckel
based upon the observation of certain features during embryonic stage
common to all vertebrates that are absent in adult. For example, the
embryos of all vertebrates including human develop a row of vestigial gill      289
slit just behind the head but it is a functional organ only in fish and not
found in any other adult vertebrates. However, this proposal was
disapproved on careful study performed by Karl Ernst von Baer. He noted
that embryos never pass through the adult stages of other animals.




                                                                                2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY


      UNIT X: CHAPTER 13; 13.1, PAGE 221                AT THE END OF FIRST
                 PARA

      Each organism has an invariably defined range of conditions that it can
      tolerate, diversity in the resources it utilises and a distinct functional role
      in the ecological system, all these together comprise its niche.


      UNIT X: CHAPTER 15; PAGE 266              IN FOURTH LINE OF     15.2.2
                 AFTER THE WORD THREATENED

      (organisms facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near
      future)




290




                                                                             2017-18
CHAPTER 4

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH


4.1   Reproductive Health –
      Problems and Strategies
4.2   Population Explosion      You have learnt about human reproductive system and its
      and Birth Control         functions in Chapter 3. Now, let’s discuss a closely related
                                topic – reproductive health. What do we understand by
4.3   Medical Termination of    this term? The term simply refers to healthy reproductive
      Pregnancy                 organs with normal functions. However, it has a broader
                                perspective and includes the emotional and social aspects
4.4   Sexually Transmitted      of reproduction also. According to the World Health
      Diseases                  Organisation (WHO), reproductive health means a total
4.5   Infertility               well-being in all aspects of reproduction, i.e., physical,
                                emotional, behavioural and social. Therefore, a society with
                                people having physically and functionally normal
                                reproductive organs and normal emotional and behavioural
                                interactions among them in all sex-related aspects might
                                be called reproductively healthy. Why is it significant to
                                maintain reproductive health and what are the methods
                                taken up to achieve it? Let us examine them.

                                4.1 REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH – PROBLEMS AND
                                    STRATEGIES
                                India was amongst the first countries in the world to
                                initiate action plans and programmes at a national level
                                to attain total reproductive health as a social goal.
                                These programmes called ‘family planning’ were
                                initiated in 1951 and were periodically assessed over
                                the past decades. Improved programmes covering wider
                                                                         BIOLOGY


     reproduction-related areas are currently in operation under the
     popular name ‘Reproductive and Child Health Care (RCH) programmes’.
     Creating awareness among people about various reproduction related
     aspects and providing facilities and support for building up a
     reproductively healthy society are the major tasks under these
     programmes.
         With the help of audio-visual and the print-media governmental and
     non-governmental agencies have taken various steps to create awareness
     among the people about reproduction-related aspects. Parents, other
     close relatives, teachers and friends, also have a major role in the
     dissemination of the above information. Introduction of sex education
     in schools should also be encouraged to provide right information to
     the young so as to discourage children from believing in myths and
     having misconceptions about sex-related aspects. Proper information
     about reproductive organs, adolescence and related changes, safe and
     hygienic sexual practices, sexually transmitted diseases (STD), AIDS,
     etc., would help people, especially those in the adolescent age group to
     lead a reproductively healthy life. Educating people, especially fertile
     couples and those in marriageable age group, about available birth
     control options, care of pregnant mothers, post-natal care of the mother
     and child, importance of breast feeding, equal opportunities for the male
     and the female child, etc., would address the importance of bringing up
     socially conscious healthy families of desired size. Awareness of problems
     due to uncontrolled population growth, social evils like sex-abuse and
     sex-related crimes, etc., need to be created to enable people to think
     and take up necessary steps to prevent them and thereby build up a
     socially responsible and healthy society.
         Successful implementation of various action plans to attain
     reproductive health requires strong infrastructural facilities, professional
     expertise and material support. These are essential to provide medical
     assistance and care to people in reproduction-related problems like
     pregnancy, delivery, STDs, abortions, contraception, menstrual problems,
     infertility, etc. Implementation of better techniques and new strategies
     from time to time are also required to provide more efficient care and
     assistance to people. Statutory ban on amniocentesis (a foetal sex
     determination test based on the chromosomal pattern in the amniotic
     fluid surrounding the developing embryo) for sex-determination to legally
     check increasing female foeticides, massive child immunisation, etc., are
     some programmes that merit mention in this connection.
         Research on various reproduction-related areas are encouraged and
58   supported by governmental and non-governmental agencies to find out
     new methods and/or to improve upon the existing ones. Do you know
     that ‘Saheli’–a new oral contraceptive for the females–was developed
     by scientists at Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI) in Lucknow, India?
     Better awareness about sex related matters, increased number of medically
     assisted deliveries and better post-natal care leading to decreased maternal
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH


and infant mortality rates, increased number of couples with small
families, better detection and cure of STDs and overall increased medical
facilities for all sex-related problems, etc. all indicate improved reproductive
health of the society.

4.2 POPULATION EXPLOSION             AND   BIRTH CONTROL
In the last century an all-round development in various fields significantly
improved the quality of life of the people. However, increased health facilities
along with better living conditions had an explosive impact on the growth
of population. The world population which was around 2 billion
(2000 million) in 1900 rocketed to about 6 billions by 2000. A similar
trend was observed in India too. Our population which was approximately
350 million at the time of our independence reached close to the billion
mark by 2000 and crossed 1 billion in May 2000. That means, every
sixth person in the world is an Indian. A rapid decline in death rate,
maternal mortality rate (MMR) and infant mortality rate (IMR) as
well as an increase in number of people in reproducible age are probable
reasons for this. Through our RCH programmes, though we could bring
down the population growth rate, it was only marginal. According to the
2001 census report, the population growth rate was still around 1.7 per
cent, i.e., 17/1000/year, a rate at which our population could double in
33 years. Such an alarming growth rate could lead to an absolute scarcity
of even the basic requirements, i.e., food, shelter and clothing, in spite of
significant progress made in those areas. Therefore, the government was
forced to take up serious measures to check this population growth rate.
    The most important step to overcome this problem is to motivate smaller
families by using various contraceptive methods. You might have seen
advertisements in the media as well as posters/bills, etc., showing a happy
couple with two children with a slogan Hum Do Hamare Do (we two, our
two). Many couples, mostly the young, urban, working ones have even
adopted an ‘one child norm’. Statutory raising of marriageable age of the
female to 18 years and that of males to 21 years, and incentives given to
couples with small families are two of the other measures taken to tackle
this problem. Let us describe some of the commonly used contraceptive
methods, which help prevent unwanted pregnancies.
    An ideal contraceptive should be user-friendly, easily available,
effective and reversible with no or least side-effects. It also should in no
way interfere with the sexual drive, desire and/or the sexual act of the
user. A wide range of contraceptive methods are presently available which
could be broadly grouped into the following categories, namely
Natural/Traditional, Barrier, IUDs, Oral contraceptives, Injectables,
                                                                                   59
Implants and Surgical methods.
    Natural methods work on the principle of avoiding chances of ovum
and sperms meeting. Periodic abstinence is one such method in which
the couples avoid or abstain from coitus from day 10 to 17 of the menstrual
cycle when ovulation could be expected. As chances of fertilisation are
                                                                                           BIOLOGY


                      very high during this period, it is called the fertile period. Therefore, by
                      abstaining from coitus during this period, conception could be prevented.
                      Withdrawal or coitus interruptus is another method in which the male
                      partner withdraws his penis from the vagina just before ejaculation so as
                      to avoid insemination. Lactational amenorrhea (absence of
                                     menstruation) method is based on the fact that ovulation
                                     and therefore the cycle do not occur during the period of
                                     intense lactation following parturition. Therefore, as long
                                     as the mother breast-feeds the child fully, chances of
Figure 4.1(a) Condom for male        conception are almost nil. However, this method has been
                                     reported to be effective only upto a maximum period of six
                                     months following parturition. As no medicines or devices
                                     are used in these methods, side effects are almost nil.
                                     Chances of failure, though, of this method are also high.
                                         In barrier methods, ovum and sperms are prevented
                                     from physically meeting with the help of barriers. Such
                                     methods are available for both males and females.
                                     Condoms (Figure 4.1 a, b) are barriers made of thin rubber/
                                     latex sheath that are used to cover the penis in the male or
Figure 4.1(b) Condom for female      vagina and cervix in the female, just before coitus so that
                                     the ejaculated semen would not enter into the female
                                     reproductive tract. This can prevent conception. ‘Nirodh’ is
                                     a popular brand of condom for the male. Use of condoms
                                     has increased in recent years due to its additional benefit of
                                     protecting the user from contracting STDs and AIDS. Both
                                     the male and the female condoms are disposable, can be
                                     self-inserted and thereby gives privacy to the user.
                                     Diaphragms, cervical caps and vaults are also barriers
                                     made of rubber that are inserted into the female reproductive
                                     tract to cover the cervix during coitus. They prevent
                                     conception by blocking the entry of sperms through the
                                     cervix. They are reusable. Spermicidal creams, jellies and
                                     foams are usually used alongwith these barriers to increase
                                     their contraceptive efficiency.
                                         Another effective and popular method is the use of Intra
                                     Uterine Devices (IUDs). These devices are inserted by
                                     doctors or expert nurses in the uterus through vagina.
                                     These Intra Uterine Devices are presently available as the
   Figure 4.2. Copper T (CuT)        non-medicated IUDs (e.g., Lippes loop), copper releasing
                      IUDs (CuT, Cu7, Multiload 375) and the hormone releasing IUDs
60                    (Progestasert, LNG-20) (Figure 4.2). IUDs increase phagocytosis of sperms
                      within the uterus and the Cu ions released suppress sperm motility
                      and the fertilising capacity of sperms. The hormone releasing IUDs,
                      in addition, make the uterus unsuitable for implantation and the
                      cervix hostile to the sperms. IUDs are ideal contraceptives for the females
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH


who want to delay pregnancy and/or space children. It is
one of most widely accepted methods of contraception in
India.
    Oral administration of small doses of either progestogens
or progestogen –estrogen combinations is another
contraceptive method used by the females. They are used
in the form of tablets and hence are popularly called the
pills. Pills have to be taken daily for a period of 21 days
starting preferably within the first five days of menstrual
cycle. After a gap of 7 days (during which menstruation
occurs) it has to be repeated in the same pattern till the                Figure 4.3 Implants
female desires to prevent conception. They inhibit ovulation
and implantation as well as alter the quality of cervical mucus to prevent/
retard entry of sperms. Pills are very effective with lesser side effects and
are well accepted by the females. Saheli –the new oral contraceptive for
the females contains a non-steroidal preparation. It is a ‘once a week’ pill
with very few side effects and high contraceptive value.
    Progestogens alone or in combination with estrogen can also be used
by females as injections or implants under the skin (Figure 4.3). Their
mode of action is similar to that of pills and their effective periods are
much longer. Administration of progestogens or progestogen-estrogen
combinations or IUDs within 72 hours of coitus have been found to be
very effective as emergency contraceptives as they could be used to avoid
possible pregnancy due to rape or casual unprotected intercourse.
    Surgical methods, also called sterilisation, are generally advised for
the male/female partner as a terminal method to prevent any more
pregnancies. Surgical intervention blocks gamete transport and thereby
prevent conception. Sterilisation procedure in the male is called ‘vasectomy’




                                                                                                61




         Figure 4.4a Vasectomy
                                                          Figure 4.4 (b) Tubectomy
                                                                            BIOLOGY


     and that in the female, ‘tubectomy’. In vasectomy, a small part of the vas
     deferens is removed or tied up through a small incision on the scrotum
     (Figure 4.4a) whereas in tubectomy, a small part of the fallopian tube is
     removed (Figure 4.4b) or tied up through a small incision in the abdomen
     or through vagina. These techniques are highly effective but their
     reversibility is very poor.
         It needs to be emphasised that the selection of a suitable contraceptive
     method and its use should always be undertaken in consultation with
     qualified medical professionals. One must also remember that
     contraceptives are not regular requirements for the maintenance of
     reproductive health. In fact, they are practiced against a natural
     reproductive event, i.e., conception/pregnancy. One is forced to use these
     methods either to prevent pregnancy or to delay or space pregnancy due
     to personal reasons. No doubt, the widespread use of these methods have
     a significant role in checking uncontrolled growth of population. However,
     their possible ill-effects like nausea, abdominal pain, breakthrough
     bleeding, irregular menstrual bleeding or even breast cancer, though not
     very significant, should not be totally ignored.

     4.3 MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY (MTP)
     Intentional or voluntary termination of pregnancy before full term is called
     medical termination of pregnancy (MTP) or induced abortion. Nearly
     45 to 50 million MTPs are performed in a year all over the world which
     accounts to 1/5th of the total number of conceived pregnancies in a year.
     Obviously, MTP has a significant role in decreasing the population though
     it is not meant for that purpose. Whether to accept / legalise MTP or not is
     being debated upon in many countries due to emotional, ethical, religious
     and social issues involved in it. Government of India legalised MTP in
     1971 with some strict conditions to avoid its misuse. Such restrictions
     are all the more important to check indiscriminate and illegal female
     foeticides which are reported to be high in India.
          Why MTP ? Obviously the answer is – to get rid of unwanted
     pregnancies either due to casual unprotected intercourse or failure of the
     contraceptive used during coitus or rapes. MTPs are also essential in
     certain cases where continuation of the pregnancy could be harmful or
     even fatal either to the mother or to the foetus or both.
          MTPs are considered relatively safe during the first trimester, i.e., upto
     12 weeks of pregnancy. Second trimester abortions are much more riskier.
     One disturbing trend observed is that a majority of the MTPs are performed
62   illegally by unqualified quacks which are not only unsafe but could be
     fatal too. Another dangerous trend is the misuse of amniocentesis to
     determine the sex of the unborn child. Frequently, if the foetus is found
     to be female, it is followed by MTP- this is totally against what is legal.
     Such practices should be avoided because these are dangerous both for
     the young mother and the foetus. Effective counselling on the need to
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH


avoid unprotected coitus and the risk factors involved in illegal abortions
as well as providing more health care facilities could reverse the mentioned
unhealthy trend.

4.4 SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES (STDS)
Diseases or infections which are transmitted through sexual intercourse
are collectively called sexually transmitted diseases (STD) or venereal
diseases (VD) or reproductive tract infections (RTI). Gonorrhoea, syphilis,
genital herpes, chlamydiasis, genital warts, trichomoniasis, hepatitis-B
and of course, the most discussed infection in the recent years, HIV leading
to AIDS are some of the common STDs. Among these, HIV infection is
most dangerous and is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
    Some of these infections like hepatitis–B and HIV can also be
transmitted by sharing of injection needles, surgical instruments, etc.,
with infected persons, transfusion of blood, or from an infected mother to
the foetus too. Except for hepatitis-B, genital herpes and HIV infections,
other diseases are completely curable if detected early and treated
properly. Early symptoms of most of these are minor and include itching,
fluid discharge, slight pain, swellings, etc., in the genital region. Infected
females may often be asymptomatic and hence, may remain undetected
for long. Absence or less significant symptoms in the early stages of
infection and the social stigma attached to the STDs, deter the infected
persons from going for timely detection and proper treatment. This could
lead to complications later, which include pelvic inflammatory diseases
(PID), abortions, still births, ectopic pregnancies, infertility or even cancer
of the reproductive tract. STDs are a major threat to a healthy society.
Therefore, prevention or early detection and cure of these diseases are
given prime consideration under the reproductive health-care
programmes. Though all persons are vulnerable to these infections, their
incidences are reported to be very high among persons in the age group
of 15-24 years – the age group to which you also belong. There is no
reason to panic because prevention is possible. One could be free of these
infections by following the simple principles given below:
      (i) Avoid sex with unknown partners/multiple partners.
      (ii) Always use condoms during coitus.
     (iii) In case of doubt, one should go to a qualified doctor for early
           detection and get complete treatment if diagnosed with disease.

4.5 INFERTILITY                                                                   63
A discussion on reproductive health is incomplete without a mention of
infertility. A large number of couples all over the world including India
are infertile, i.e., they are unable to produce children inspite of unprotected
sexual co-habitation. The reasons for this could be many–physical,
congenital, diseases, drugs, immunological or even psychological.
                                                                           BIOLOGY


     In India, often the female is blamed for the couple being childless, but
     more often than not, the problem lies in the male partner. Specialised
     health care units (infertility clinics, etc.) could help in diagnosis and
     corrective treatment of some of these disorders and enable these couples to
     have children. However, where such corrections are not possible, the couples
     could be assisted to have children through certain special techniques
     commonly known as assisted reproductive technologies (ART).
          In vitro fertilisation (IVF–fertilisation outside the body in almost
     similar conditions as that in the body) followed by embryo transfer (ET)
     is one of such methods. In this method, popularly known as test tube
     baby programme, ova from the wife/donor (female) and sperms from the
     husband/donor (male) are collected and are induced to form zygote under
     simulated conditions in the laboratory. The zygote or early embryos (with
     upto 8 blastomeres) could then be transferred into the fallopian tube
     (ZIFT–zygote intra fallopian transfer) and embryos with more than
     8 blastomeres, into the uterus (IUT – intra uterine transfer), to complete
     its further development. Embryos formed by in-vivo fertilisation (fusion
     of gametes within the female) also could be used for such transfer to assist
     those females who cannot conceive.
          Transfer of an ovum collected from a donor into the fallopian tube
     (GIFT – gamete intra fallopian transfer) of another female who cannot
     produce one, but can provide suitable environment for fertilisation and
     further development is another method attempted. Intra cytoplasmic
     sperm injection (ICSI) is another specialised procedure to form an embryo
     in the laboratory in which a sperm is directly injected into the ovum.
     Infertility cases either due to inability of the male partner to inseminate
     the female or due to very low sperm counts in the ejaculates, could be
     corrected by artificial insemination (AI) technique. In this technique,
     the semen collected either from the husband or a healthy donor is artificially
     introduced either into the vagina or into the uterus (IUI – intra-uterine
     insemination) of the female.
          Though options are many, all these techniques require extremely
     high precision handling by specialised professionals and expensive
     instrumentation. Therefore, these facilities are presently available only
     in very few centres in the country. Obviously their benefits is affordable
     to only a limited number of people. Emotional, religious and social
     factors are also deterrents in the adoption of these methods. Since the
64   ultimate aim of all these procedures is to have children, in India we have
     so many orphaned and destitute children, who would probably not
     survive till maturity, unless taken care of. Our laws permit legal adoption
     and it is as yet, one of the best methods for couples looking for
     parenthood.
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH




                                SUMMARY

   Reproductive health refers to a total well-being in all aspects of
   reproduction, i.e., physical, emotional, behavioural and social. Our
   nation was the first nation in the world to initiate various action plans
   at national level towards attaining a reproductively healthy society.
       Counselling and creating awareness among people about
   reproductive organs, adolescence and associated changes, safe and
   hygienic sexual practices, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
   including AIDS, etc., is the primary step towards reproductive health.
   Providing medical facilities and care to the problems like menstrual
   irregularities, pregnancy related aspects, delivery, medical termination
   of pregnancy, STDs, birth control, infertility, post natal child and
   maternal management is another important aspect of the Reproductive
   and Child Health Care programmes.
       An overall improvement in reproductive health has taken place in
   our country as indicated by reduced maternal and infant mortality
   rates, early detection and cure of STDs, assistance to infertile couples,
   etc. Improved health facilities and better living conditions promoted an
   explosive growth of population. Such a growth necessitated intense
   propagation of contraceptive methods. Various contraceptive options
   are available now such as natural, traditional, barrier, IUDs, pills,
   injectables, implants and surgical methods. Though contraceptives are
   not regular requirements for reproductive health, one is forced to use
   them to avoid pregnancy or to delay or space pregnancy.
       Medical termination of pregnancy is legalised in our country. MTP is
   generally performed to get rid of unwanted pregnancy due to rapes, casual
   relationship, etc., as also in cases when the continuation of pregnancy
   could be harmful or even fatal to either the mother, or the foetus or both.
       Diseases or infections transmitted through sexual intercourse are
   called Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs). Pelvic Inflammatory
   Diseases (PIDs), still birth, infertility are some of the complications of
   them. Early detection facilitate better cure of these diseases. Avoiding
   sexual intercourse with unknown/multiple partners, use of condoms
   during coitus are some of the simple precautions to avoid contracting
   STDs.
       Inability to conceive or produce children even after 2 years of
                                                                                 65
   unprotected sexual cohabitation is called infertility. Various methods
   are now available to help such couples. In Vitro fertilisation followed by
   transfer of embryo into the female genital tract is one such method and
   is commonly known as the ‘Test Tube Baby’ Programme.
                                                                             BIOLOGY




                             EXERCISES
      1.   What do you think is the significance of reproductive health in a society?
      2.   Suggest the aspects of reproductive health which need to be given
           special attention in the present scenario.
      3.   Is sex education necessary in schools? Why?
      4.   Do you think that reproductive health in our country has improved in
           the past 50 years? If yes, mention some such areas of improvement.
      5.   What are the suggested reasons for population explosion?
      6.   Is the use of contraceptives justified? Give reasons.
      7.   Removal of gonads cannot be considered as a contraceptive option. Why?
      8.   Amniocentesis for sex determination is banned in our country. Is this
           ban necessary? Comment.
      9.   Suggest some methods to assist infertile couples to have children.
     10. What are the measures one has to take to prevent from contracting STDs?
     11. State True/False with explanation
           (a) Abortions could happen spontaneously too. (True/False)
           (b) Infertility is defined as the inability to produce a viable offspring
               and is always due to abnormalities/defects in the female partner.
               (True/False)
           (c) Complete lactation could help as a natural method of
               contraception. (True/False)
           (d) Creating awareness about sex related aspects is an effective
               method to improve reproductive health of the people. (True/False)
     12. Correct the following statements :
           (a) Surgical methods of contraception prevent gamete formation.
           (b) All sexually transmitted diseases are completely curable.
           (c) Oral pills are very popular contraceptives among the rural women.
           (d) In E. T. techniques, embryos are always transferred into the uterus.




66
Chapter 8                       Biology is the youngest of the formalised disciplines of natural
Human Health and Disease        science. Progress in physics and chemistry proceeded much
                                faster than in Biology. Applications of physics and chemistry in
Chapter 9                       our daily life also have a higher visibility than those of biology.
Strategies for Enhancement in   However, twentieth century and certainly twenty-first century
Food Production                 has demonstrated the utility of biological knowledge in
                                furthering human welfare, be it in health sector or agriculture.
Chapter 10                      The discovery of antibiotics, and synthetic plant-derived drugs,
Microbes in Human Welfare       anaesthetics have changed medical practice on one hand
                                and human health on the other hand. Life expectancy of
                                human beings have dramatically changed over the years.
                                Agricultural practices, food processing and diagnostics have
                                brought socio-cultural changes in human communities. These
                                are briefly described in the following three chapters of this unit.
                   Born in August 1925 in Kumbakonam in Tamil Nadu, Monkambu Sambasivan
                   Swaminathan did his graduation and post-graduation in Botany from
                   Madras University. He worked in different capacities in large number of
                   institutions in India and abroad and developed his expertise in genetics
                   and plant breeding.
                        The School of Cytogenetics and Radiation Research established at the
                   Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) enabled Swaminathan and his
                   team to develop short-duration high-yielding varieties of rice including scented
                   Basmati. He is also known for the development of the concept of crop
                   cafeteria, crop scheduling and genetically improving the yield and quality.
                        Swaminathan initiated collaboration with Norman Borlaug, which
                   culminated in the ‘Green Revolution’ through introduction of Mexican
M.S. SWAMINATHAN   varieties of wheat in India. This was highly recognised and appreciated. He
      (1925)
                   is also the initiator of ‘Lab-to-Land’, food security and several other
                   environmental programmes. He has been honoured with Padma Bhushan
                   and several other prestigious awards, medals and fellowships by institutions
                   of excellence.
CHAPTER 8

HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


8.1   Common Diseases in
      Humans
8.2   Immunity
                                Health, for a long time, was considered as a state of body
                                and mind where there was a balance of certain ‘humors’.
8.3   AIDS                      This is what early Greeks like Hippocrates as well as
8.4   Cancer                    Indian Ayurveda system of medicine asserted. It was
                                thought that persons with ‘blackbile’ belonged to hot
8.5   Drugs and Alcohol Abuse
                                personality and would have fevers. This idea was arrived
                                at by pure reflective thought. The discovery of blood
                                circulation by William Harvey using experimental method
                                and the demonstration of normal body temperature in
                                persons with blackbile using thermometer disproved the
                                ‘good humor’ hypothesis of health. In later years, biology
                                stated that mind influences, through neural system and
                                endocrine system, our immune system and that our
                                immune system maintains our health. Hence, mind and
                                mental state can affect our health. Of course, health is
                                affected by –
                                   (i) genetic disorders – deficiencies with which a child is
                                       born and deficiencies/defects which the child inherits
                                       from parents from birth;
                                  (ii) infections and
                                 (iii) life style including food and water we take, rest and
                                       exercise we give to our bodies, habits that we have or
                                       lack etc.
                                                                         BIOLOGY


          The term health is very frequently used by everybody. How do we
      define it? Health does not simply mean ‘absence of disease’ or ‘physical
      fitness’. It could be defined as a state of complete physical, mental and
      social well-being. When people are healthy, they are more efficient at
      work. This increases productivity and brings economic prosperity. Health
      also increases longevity of people and reduces infant and maternal
      mortality.
          Balanced diet, personal hygiene and regular exercise are very important
      to maintain good health. Yoga has been practised since time immemorial
      to achieve physical and mental health. Awareness about diseases and
      their effect on different bodily functions, vaccination (immunisation)
      against infectious diseases, proper disposal of wastes, control of vectors
      and maintenance of hygienic food and water resources are necessary for
      achieving good health.
          When the functioning of one or more organs or systems of the body is
      adversely affected, characterised by various signs and symptoms, we say
      that we are not healthy, i.e., we have a disease. Diseases can be broadly
      grouped into infectious and non-infectious. Diseases which are easily
      transmitted from one person to another, are called infectious diseases.
      Infectious diseases are very common and every one of us suffers from
      these at sometime or other. Some of the infectious diseases like AIDS are
      fatal. Among non-infectious diseases, cancer is the major cause of death.
      Drug and alcohol abuse also affect our health adversely.

      8.1 COMMON DISEASES           IN   HUMANS
      A wide range of organisms belonging to bacteria, viruses, fungi,
      protozoans, helminths, etc., could cause diseases in man. Such disease-
      causing organisms are called pathogens. Most parasites are therefore
      pathogens as they cause harm to the host by living in (or on) them. The
      pathogens can enter our body by various means, multiply and interfere
      with normal vital activities, resulting in morphological and functional
      damage. Pathogens have to adapt to life within the environment of the
      host. For example, the pathogens that enter the gut must know a way of
      surviving in the stomach at low pH and resisting the various digestive
      enzymes. A few representative members from different groups of
      pathogenic organisms are discussed here alongwith the diseases caused
      by them. Preventive and control measures against these diseases in general,
      are also briefly described.
146       Salmonella typhi is a pathogenic bacterium which causes typhoid
      fever in human beings. These pathogens generally enter the small intestine
      through food and water contaminated with them and migrate to other
      organs through blood. Sustained high fever (39° to 40°C), weakness,
      stomach pain, constipation, headache and loss of appetite are some of
      the common symptoms of this disease. Intestinal perforation and death
      may occur in severe cases. Typhoid fever could be confirmed by
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


Widal test. A classic case in medicine, that of Mary Mallon nicknamed
Typhoid Mary, is worth mentioning here. She was a cook by profession
and was a typhoid carrier who continued to spread typhoid for several
years through the food she prepared.
    Bacteria like Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae
are responsible for the disease pneumonia in humans which infects the
alveoli (air filled sacs) of the lungs. As a result of the infection, the alveoli
get filled with fluid leading to severe problems in respiration. The symptoms
of pneumonia include fever, chills, cough and headache. In severe cases,
the lips and finger nails may turn gray to bluish in colour. A healthy
person acquires the infection by inhaling the droplets/aerosols released
by an infected person or even by sharing glasses and utensils with an
infected person. Dysentery, plague, diphtheria, etc., are some of the other
bacterial diseases in man.
    Many viruses also cause diseases in human beings. Rhino viruses
represent one such group of viruses which cause one of the most infectious
human ailments – the common cold. They infect the nose and respiratory
passage but not the lungs. The common cold is characterised by nasal
congestion and discharge, sore throat, hoarseness, cough, headache,
tiredness, etc., which usually last for 3-7 days. Droplets resulting from
cough or sneezes of an infected person are either inhaled directly or
transmitted through contaminated objects such as pens, books, cups,
doorknobs, computer keyboard or mouse, etc., and cause infection in a
healthy person.
    Some of the human diseases are caused by protozoans too. You might
have heard about malaria, a disease man has been fighting since many
years. Plasmodium, a tiny protozoan is responsible for this disease. Different
species of Plasmodium (P. vivax, P. malaria and P. falciparum) are
responsible for different types of malaria. Of these, malignant malaria caused
by Plasmodium falciparum is the most serious one and can even be fatal.
    Let us take a glance at the life cycle of Plasmodium (Figure 8.1).
Plasmodium enters the human body as sporozoites (infectious form)
through the bite of infected female Anopheles mosquito. The parasites
initially multiply within the liver cells and then attack the red blood cells
(RBCs) resulting in their rupture. The rupture of RBCs is associated with
release of a toxic substance, haemozoin, which is responsible for the chill
and high fever recurring every three to four days. When a female Anopheles
mosquito bites an infected person, these parasites enter the mosquito’s
body and undergo further development. The parasites multiply within
them to form sporozoites that are stored in their salivary glands. When
                                                                                    147
these mosquitoes bite a human, the sporozoites are introduced into his/
her body, thereby initiating the events mentioned above. It is interesting
to note that the malarial parasite requires two hosts – human and
mosquitoes – to complete its life cycle (Figure 8.1); the female Anopheles
mosquito is the vector (transmitting agent) too.
                                                                         BIOLOGY




148      Figure 8.1 Stages in the life cycle of Plasmodium

          Entamoeba histolytica is a protozoan parasite in the large intestine of
      human which causes amoebiasis (amoebic dysentery). Symptoms of
      this disease include constipation, abdominal pain and cramps, stools
      with excess mucous and blood clots. Houseflies act as mechanical carriers
      and serve to transmit the parasite from faeces of infected person to food
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


and food products, thereby contaminating them.
Drinking water and food contaminated by the faecal
matter are the main source of infection.
    Ascaris, the common round worm and Wuchereria,
the filarial worm, are some of the helminths which are
known to be pathogenic to man. Ascaris, an intestinal
parasite causes ascariasis. Symptoms of these disease
include internal bleeding, muscular pain, fever, anemia
and blockage of the intestinal passage. The eggs of the
parasite are excreted along with the faeces of infected
persons which contaminate soil, water, plants, etc. A
healthy person acquires this infection through
contaminated water, vegetables, fruits, etc.
    Wuchereria (W. bancrofti and W. malayi), the filarial
worms cause a slowly developing chronic inflammation
of the organs in which they live for many years, usually
the lymphatic vessels of the lower limbs and the disease
is called elephantiasis or filariasis (Figure 8.2). The
genital organs are also often affected, resulting in gross
deformities. The pathogens are transmitted to a healthy         Figure 8.2      Diagram showing
person through the bite by the female mosquito vectors.                         inflammation in one
    Many fungi belonging to the genera Microsporum,                             of the lower limbs due
                                                                                to elephantiasis
T richophyton and Epidermophyton are
responsible for ringworms which is one of
the most common infectious diseases in man.
Appearance of dry, scaly lesions on various
parts of the body such as skin, nails and
scalp (Figure 8.3) are the main symptoms of
the disease. These lesions are accompanied
by intense itching. Heat and moisture help
these fungi to grow, which makes them thrive
in skin folds such as those in the groin or
between the toes. Ringworms are generally              Figure 8.3 Diagram showing ringworm
acquired from soil or by using towels, clothes                    affected area of the skin
or even the comb of infected individuals.
    Maintenance of personal and public hygiene is very important for
prevention and control of many infectious diseases. Measures for personal
hygiene include keeping the body clean; consumption of clean drinking
water, food, vegetables, fruits, etc. Public hygiene includes proper disposal                    149
of waste and excreta; periodic cleaning and disinfection of water reservoirs,
pools, cesspools and tanks and observing standard practices of hygiene
in public catering. These measures are particularly essential where the
infectious agents are transmitted through food and water such as typhoid,
amoebiasis and ascariasis. In cases of air-borne diseases such as
pneumonia and common cold, in addition to the above measures, close
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      contact with the infected persons or their belongings should be avoided.
      For diseases such as malaria and filariasis that are transmitted through
      insect vectors, the most important measure is to control or eliminate the
      vectors and their breeding places. This can be achieved by avoiding
      stagnation of water in and around residential areas, regular cleaning of
      household coolers, use of mosquito nets, introducing fishes like Gambusia
      in ponds that feed on mosquito larvae, spraying of insecticides in ditches,
      drainage areas and swamps, etc. In addition, doors and windows should
      be provided with wire mesh to prevent the entry of mosquitoes. Such
      precautions have become all the more important especially in the light of
      recent widespread incidences of the vector-borne (Aedes mosquitoes)
      diseases like dengue and chikungunya in many parts of India.
          The advancements made in biological science have armed us to
      effectively deal with many infectious diseases. The use of vaccines and
      immunisation programmes have enabled us to completely eradicate a
      deadly disease like smallpox. A large number of other infectious diseases
      like polio, diphtheria, pneumonia and tetanus have been controlled to a
      large extent by the use of vaccines. Biotechnology (about which you will
      read more in Chapter 12) is at the verge of making available newer and
      safer vaccines. Discovery of antibiotics and various other drugs has also
      enabled us to effectively treat infectious diseases.

      8.2 IMMUNITY
      Everyday we are exposed to large number of infectious agents. However,
      only a few of these exposures result in disease. Why? This is due to the
      fact that the body is able to defend itself from most of these foreign agents.
      This overall ability of the host to fight the disease-causing organisms,
      conferred by the immune system is called immunity.
          Immunity is of two types: (i) Innate immunity and (ii) Acquired
      immunity.

      8.2.1 Innate Immunity
      Innate immunity is non-specific type of defence, that is present at the
      time of birth. This is accomplished by providing different types of barriers
      to the entry of the foreign agents into our body. Innate immunity consist
      of four types of barriers. These are —
         (i) Physical barriers : Skin on our body is the main barrier which
             prevents entry of the micro-organisms. Mucus coating of the
150          epithelium lining the respiratory, gastrointestinal and urogenital
             tracts also help in trapping microbes entering our body.
        (ii) Physiological barriers : Acid in the stomach, saliva in the mouth,
             tears from eyes–all prevent microbial growth.
       (iii) Cellular barriers : Certain types of leukocytes (WBC) of our body
             like polymorpho-nuclear leukocytes (PMNL-neutrophils) and
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


      monocytes and natural killer (type of lymphocytes) in the blood as
      well as macrophages in tissues can phagocytose and destroy
      microbes.
 (iv) Cytokine barriers : Virus-infected cells secrete proteins called
      interferons which protect non-infected cells from further viral infection.

8.2.2 Acquired Immunity
Acquired immunity, on the other hand, is pathogen specific. It is
characterised by memory. This means that our body when it encounters
a pathogen for the first time produces a response called primary response
which is of low intensity. Subsequent encounter with the same pathogen
elicits a highly intensified secondary or anamnestic response. This
is ascribed to the fact that our body appears to have memory of the
first encounter.
     The primary and secondary
immune responses are carried
out with the help of two
special types of lymphocytes
present in our blood,
i.e., B-lymphocytes and T-
lymphocytes.The B-lymphocytes
produce an army of proteins in
response to pathogens into our
blood to fight with them. These
proteins are called antibodies.
The T-cells themselves do not
secrete antibodies but help B
cells produce them. Each
antibody molecule has four
peptide chains, two small called
light chains and two longer
called heavy chains. Hence, an
antibody is represented as H2L2.
                                              Figure 8.4 Structure of an antibody molecule
Different types of antibodies are
produced in our body. IgA, IgM, IgE, IgG are some of them. A cartoon of
an antibody is given in Figure 8.4. Because these antibodies are found in
the blood, the response is also called as humoral immune response.
This is one of the two types of our acquired immune response – antibody
mediated. The second type is called cell-mediated immune response or                         151
cell-mediated immunity (CMI). The T-lymphocytes mediate CMI. Very
often, when some human organs like heart, eye, liver, kidney fail to function
satisfactorily, transplantation is the only remedy to enable the patient to
live a normal life. Then a search begins – to find a suitable donor. Why is
it that the organs cannot be taken from just anybody? What is it that
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      the doctors check? Grafts from just any source – an animal, another
      primate, or any human beings cannot be made since the grafts would be
      rejected sooner or later. Tissue matching, blood group matching are
      essential before undertaking any graft/transplant and even after this the
      patient has to take immuno–suppresants all his/her life. The body is able
      to differentiate ‘self ’ and ‘nonself’ and the cell-mediated immune response
      is responsible for the graft rejection.

      8.2.3 Active and Passive Immunity
      When a host is exposed to antigens, which may be in the form of living
      or dead microbes or other proteins, antibodies are produced in the host
      body. This type of immunity is called active immunity. Active immunity
      is slow and takes time to give its full effective response. Injecting the
      microbes deliberately during immunisation or infectious organisms
      gaining access into body during natural infection induce active
      immunity. When ready-made antibodies are directly given to protect
      the body against foreign agents, it is called passive immunity. Do you
      know why mother’s milk is considered very essential for the new-
      born infant? The yellowish fluid colostrum secreted by mother during
      the initial days of lactation has abundant antibodies (IgA) to protect the
      infant. The foetus also receives some antibodies from their mother,
      through the placenta during pregnancy. These are some examples of
      passive immunity.

      8.2.4 Vaccination and Immunisation
      The principle of immunisation or vaccination is based on the property of
      ‘memory’ of the immune system. In vaccination, a preparation of antigenic
      proteins of pathogen or inactivated/weakened pathogen (vaccine) are
      introduced into the body. The antibodies produced in the body against
      these antigens would neutralise the pathogenic agents during actual
      infection. The vaccines also generate memory – B and T-cells that recognise
      the pathogen quickly on subsequent exposure and overwhelm the
      invaders with a massive production of antibodies. If a person is infected
      with some deadly microbes to which quick immune response is required
      as in tetanus, we need to directly inject the preformed antibodies, or
      antitoxin (a preparation containing antibodies to the toxin). Even in cases
      of snakebites, the injection which is given to the patients, contain preformed
152   antibodies against the snake venom. This type of immunisation is called
      passive immunisation.
           Recombinant DNA technology has allowed the production of antigenic
      polypeptides of pathogen in bacteria or yeast. Vaccines produced using
      this approach allow large scale production and hence greater availability
      for immunisation, e.g., hepatitis B vaccine produced from yeast.
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


8.2.5 Allergies
When you have gone to a new place and suddenly you started sneezing,
wheezing for no explained reason, and when you went away, your
symptoms dissappeared. Did this happen to you? Some of us are sensitive
to some particles in the environment. The above-mentioned reaction could
be because of allergy to pollen, mites, etc., which are different in different
places.
     The exaggerated response of the immune system to certain antigens
present in the environment is called allergy. The substances to which
such an immune response is produced are called allergens. The antibodies
produced to these are of IgE type. Common examples of allergens are
mites in dust, pollens, animal dander, etc. Symptoms of allergic reactions
include sneezing, watery eyes, running nose and difficulty in breathing.
Allergy is due to the release of chemicals like histamine and serotonin
from the mast cells. For determining the cause of allergy, the patient is
exposed to or injected with very small doses of possible allergens, and the
reactions studied. The use of drugs like anti-histamine, adrenalin and
steroids quickly reduce the symptoms of allergy. Somehow, modern-day
life style has resulted in lowering of immunity and more sensitivity to
allergens – more and more children in metro cities of India suffer from
allergies and asthma due to sensitivity to the environment. This could be
because of the protected environment provided early in life.

8.2.6 Auto Immunity
Memory-based acquired immunity evolved in higher vertebrates based
on the ability to differentiate foreign organisms (e.g., pathogens) from self-
cells. While we still do not understand the basis of this, two corollaries of
this ability have to be understood. One, higher vertebrates can distinguish
foreign molecules as well as foreign organisms. Most of the experimental
immunology deals with this aspect. Two, sometimes, due to genetic and
other unknown reasons, the body attacks self-cells. This results in damage
to the body and is called auto-immune disease. Rheumatoid arthritis
which affects many people in our society is an auto-immune disease.

8.2.7 Immune System in the Body
The human immune system consists of lymphoid organs, tissues, cells
and soluble molecules like antibodies. As you have read, immune system
is unique in the sense that it recognises foreign antigens, responds to
                                                                                 153
these and remembers them. The immune system also plays an important
role in allergic reactions, auto-immune diseases and organ
transplantation.
Lymphoid organs: These are the organs where origin and/or maturation
and proliferation of lymphocytes occur. The primary lymphoid organs
are bone marrow and thymus where immature lymphocytes differentiate
                                                                                           BIOLOGY


                                 into antigen-sensitive lymphocytes. After maturation the
                                 lymphocytes migrate to secondary lymphoid organs like spleen,
                                 lymph nodes, tonsils, Peyer’s patches of small intestine and
                                 appendix. The secondary lymphoid organs provide the sites for
                                 interaction of lymphocytes with the antigen, which then proliferate
                                 to become effector cells. The location of various lymphoid organs
                                 in the human body is shown in Figure 8.5.
                                     The bone marrow is the main lymphoid organ where all
                                 blood cells including lymphocytes are produced. The thymus
                                 is a lobed organ located near the heart and beneath the
                                 breastbone. The thymus is quite large at the time of birth but
                                 keeps reducing in size with age and by the time puberty is
                                 attained it reduces to a very small size. Both bone-marrow
                                 and thymus provide micro-environments for the development
                                 and maturation of T-lymphocytes. The spleen is a large bean-
                                 shaped organ. It mainly contains lymphocytes and phagocytes.
 Figure 8.5   Diagrammatic       It acts as a filter of the blood by trapping blood-borne micro-
              representation
                                 organisms. Spleen also has a large reservoir of erythrocytes.
              of L ymph nodes
                                 The lymph nodes are small solid structures located at different
                      points along the lymphatic system. Lymph nodes serve to trap the
                      micro-organisms or other antigens, which happen to get into the lymph
                      and tissue fluid. Antigens trapped in the lymph nodes are responsible for
                      the activation of lymphocytes present there and cause the immune
                      response.
                          There is lymphoid tissue also located within the lining of the major
                      tracts (respiratory, digestive and urogenital tracts) called mucosa-
                      associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). It constitutes about 50 per cent of
                      the lymphoid tissue in human body.

                     8.3 AIDS
                     The word AIDS stands for Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome.
                     This means deficiency of immune system, acquired during the lifetime of
                     an individual indicating that it is not a congenital disease. ‘Syndrome’
                     means a group of symptoms. AIDS was first reported in 1981 and in the
                     last twenty-five years or so, it has spread all over the world killing more
                     than 25 million persons.
                         AIDS is caused by the Human Immuno deficiency Virus (HIV), a
                     member of a group of viruses called retrovirus, which have an envelope
154                  enclosing the RNA genome (Figure 8.6). Transmission of HIV-infection
                     generally occurs by (a) sexual contact with infected person, (b) by
                     transfusion of contaminated blood and blood products, (c) by sharing
                     infected needles as in the case of intravenous drug abusers and (d) from
                     infected mother to her child through placenta. So, people who are at high
                     risk of getting this infection includes - individuals who have multiple
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE




                                Figure 8.6 Replication of retrovirus


sexual partners, drug addicts who take drugs intravenously, individuals
who require repeated blood transfusions and children born to an HIV
infected mother. Do you know –when do people need repeated blood
transfusion? Find out and make a list of such conditions. It is important      155
to note that HIV/AIDS is not spread by mere touch or physical contact; it
spreads only through body fluids. It is, hence, imperative, for the physical
and psychological well-being, that the HIV/AIDS infected persons are
not isolated from family and society. There is always a time-lag between
the infection and appearance of AIDS symptoms. This period may vary
from a few months to many years (usually 5-10 years).
                                                                               BIOLOGY


           After getting into the body of the person, the virus enters into macrophages
      where RNA genome of the virus replicates to form viral DNA with the help of
      the enzyme reverse transcriptase. This viral DNA gets incorporated into host
      cell’s DNA and directs the infected cells to produce virus particles (Figure 8.6).
      The macrophages continue to produce virus and in this way acts like a HIV
      factory.        Simultaneously,            HIV       enters       into     helper
      T-lymphocytes (TH), replicates and produce progeny viruses. The progeny
      viruses released in the blood attack other helper T-lymphocytes. This is
      repeated leading to a progressive decrease in the number of helper T-
      lymphocytes in the body of the infected person. During this period, the person
      suffers from bouts of fever, diarrhoea and weight loss. Due to decrease in
      the number of helper T lymphocytes, the person starts suffering from infections
      that could have been otherwise overcome such as those due to bacteria
      especially Mycobacterium, viruses, fungi and even parasites like Toxoplasma.
      The patient becomes so immuno-deficient that he/she is unable to protect
      himself/herself against these infections. A widely used diagnostic test for
      AIDS is enzyme linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA). Treatment of AIDS
      with anti-retroviral drugs is only partially effective. They can only prolong
      the life of the patient but cannot prevent death, which is inevitable.
      Prevention of AIDS : As AIDS has no cure, prevention is the best option.
      Moreover, HIV infection, more often, spreads due to conscious behaviour
      patterns and is not something that happens inadvertently, like pneumonia
      or typhoid. Of course, infection in blood transfusion patients, new-borns
      (from mother) etc., may take place due to poor monitoring. The only excuse
      may be ignorance and it has been rightly said – “don’t die of ignorance”.
      In our country the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) and other
      non-governmental organisation (NGOs) are doing a lot to educate people
      about AIDS. WHO has started a number of programmes to prevent the
      spreading of HIV infection. Making blood (from blood banks) safe from
      HIV, ensuring the use of only disposable needles and syringes in public
      and private hospitals and clinics, free distribution of condoms, controlling
      drug abuse, advocating safe sex and promoting regular check-ups for
      HIV in susceptible populations, are some such steps taken up.
          Infection with HIV or having AIDS is something that should not be
      hidden – since then, the infection may spread to many more people.
      HIV/AIDS-infected people need help and sympathy instead of being
      shunned by society. Unless society recognises it as a problem to be dealt
      with in a collective manner – the chances of wider spread of the disease
156   increase manifold. It is a malady that can only be tackled, by the society
      and medical fraternity acting together, to prevent the spread of the disease.

      8.4 CANCER
      Cancer is one of the most dreaded diseases of human beings and is a major
      cause of death all over the globe. More than a million Indians suffer from
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


cancer and a large number of them die from it annually. The mechanisms
that underlie development of cancer or oncogenic transformation of cells,
its treatment and control have been some of the most intense areas of
research in biology and medicine.
    In our body, cell growth and differentiation is highly controlled and
regulated. In cancer cells, there is breakdown of these regulatory
mechanisms. Normal cells show a property called contact inhibition by
virtue of which contact with other cells inhibits their uncontrolled growth.
Cancer cells appears to have lost this property. As a result of this, cancerous
cells just continue to divide giving rise to masses of cells called tumors.
Tumors are of two types: benign and malignant. Benign tumors normally
remain confined to their original location and do not spread to other parts
of the body and cause little damage. The malignant tumors, on the
other hand are a mass of proliferating cells called neoplastic or tumor
cells. These cells grow very rapidly, invading and damaging the
surrounding normal tissues. As these cells actively divide and grow they
also starve the normal cells by competing for vital nutrients. Cells sloughed
from such tumors reach distant sites through blood, and wherever they
get lodged in the body, they start a new tumor there. This property called
metastasis is the most feared property of malignant tumors.
Causes of cancer : Transformation of normal cells into cancerous
neoplastic cells may be induced by physical, chemical or biological agents.
These agents are called carcinogens. Ionising radiations like X-rays and
gamma rays and non-ionizing radiations like UV cause DNA damage
leading to neoplastic transformation. The chemical carcinogens present
in tobacco smoke have been identified as a major cause of lung cancer.
Cancer causing viruses called oncogenic viruses have genes called viral
oncogenes. Furthermore, several genes called cellular oncogenes
(c-onc) or proto oncogenes have been identified in normal cells which,
when activated under certain conditions, could lead to oncogenic
transformation of the cells.
Cancer detection and diagnosis : Early detection of cancers is essential
as it allows the disease to be treated successfully in many cases. Cancer
detection is based on biopsy and histopathological studies of the tissue
and blood and bone marrow tests for increased cell counts in the case of
leukemias. In biopsy, a piece of the suspected tissue cut into thin sections
is stained and examined under microscope (histopathological studies) by
a pathologist. Techniques like radiography (use of X-rays), CT (computed
tomography) and MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) are very useful to               157
detect cancers of the internal organs. Computed tomography uses X-rays
to generate a three-dimensional image of the internals of an object. MRI
uses strong magnetic fields and non-ionising radiations to accurately detect
pathological and physiological changes in the living tissue.
    Antibodies against cancer -specific antigens are also used for
detection of certain cancers. Techniques of molecular biology can be
                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                    applied to detect genes in individuals with inherited susceptibility to
                    certain cancers. Identification of such genes, which predispose an
                    individual to certain cancers, may be very helpful in prevention of
                    cancers. Such individuals may be advised to avoid exposure to
                    particular carcinogens to which they are susceptible (e.g., tobacco
                    smoke in case of lung cancer).
                    Treatment of cancer : The common approaches for treatment of cancer
                    are surgery, radiation therapy and immunotherapy. In radiotherapy,
                    tumor cells are irradiated lethally, taking proper care of the normal tissues
                    surrounding the tumor mass. Several chemotherapeutic drugs are used
                    to kill cancerous cells. Some of these are specific for particular tumors.
                    Majority of drugs have side effects like hair loss, anemia, etc. Most cancers
                    are treated by combination of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
                    Tumor cells have been shown to avoid detection and destruction by
                    immune system. Therefore, the patients are given substances called
                    biological response modifiers such as α-interferon which activates their
                    immune system and helps in destroying the tumor.

                    8.5 DRUGS      AND   ALCOHOL ABUSE
                    Surveys and statistics show that use of drugs and alcohol has been on
                    the rise especially among the youth. This is really a cause of concern as it
                    could result in many harmful effects. Proper education and guidance
                    would enable youth to safeguard themselves against these dangerous
                    behaviour patterns and follow healthy lifestyles.
                        The drugs, which are commonly abused are opioids, cannabinoids
                    and coca alkaloids. Majority of these are obtained from flowering plants.
                    Some are obtained from fungi.
                        Opioids are the drugs, which bind to specific opioid receptors present
                    in our central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. Heroin
                    (Figure 8.7), commonly called smack is chemically diacetylmorphine which
                    is a white, odourless, bitter crystalline compound. This is obtained by
                    acetylation of morphine (Figure 8.7), which is extracted from the latex of




158




      Figure 8.7 Chemical structure of Morphine                Figure 8.8 Opium poppy
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


poppy plant Papaver somniferum (Figure 8.8). Generally taken by snorting
and injection, heroin is a depressant and slows down body functions.
    Cannabinoids are a group of chemicals (Figure 8.9), which interact
with cannabinoid receptors present principally in the brain. Natural
cannabinoids are obtained from the inflorescences of the plant Cannabis
sativa (Figure 8.10). The flower tops, leaves and the resin of cannabis
plant are used in various combinations to produce marijuana, hashish,
charas and ganja. Generally taken by inhalation and oral ingestion, these
are known for their effects on cardiovascular system of the body.




   Figure 8.9 Skeletal structure of                      Figure 8.10 Leaves of Cannabis sativa
              cannabinoid molecule

    Coca alkaloid or cocaine is obtained from coca
plant Erythroxylum coca, native to South America. It
interferes with the transport of the neuro-transmitter
dopamine. Cocaine, commonly called coke or crack is
usually snorted. It has a potent stimulating action on
central nervous system, producing a sense of euphoria
and increased energy. Excessive dosage of cocaine
causes hallucinations. Other well-known plants with
hallucinogenic properties are Atropa belladona and
Datura (Figure 8.11). These days cannabinoids are also
being abused by some sportspersons.
     Drugs like barbiturates, amphetamines,
benzodiazepines, and other similar drugs, that are
normally used as medicines to help patients cope with         Figure 8.11 Flowering branch of Datura
mental illnesses like depression and insomnia, are often
abused. Morphine is a very effective sedative and painkiller, and is very useful                159
in patients who have undergone surgery. Several plants, fruits and seeds
having hallucinogenic properties have been used for hundreds of years in
folk-medicine, religious ceremonies and rituals all over the globe. When these
are taken for a purpose other than medicinal use or in amounts/frequency
that impairs one’s physical, physiological or psychological functions, it
constitutes drug abuse.
                                                                          BIOLOGY


          Smoking also paves the way to hard drugs. Tobacco has been used
      by human beings for more than 400 years. It is smoked, chewed or used
      as a snuff. Tobacco contains a large number of chemical substances
      including nicotine, an alkaloid. Nicotine stimulates adrenal gland to
      release adrenaline and nor-adrenaline into blood circulation, both of
      which raise blood pressure and increase heart rate. Smoking is associated
      with increased incidence of cancers of lung, urinary bladder and throat,
      bronchitis, emphysema, coronary heart disease, gastric ulcer, etc. Tobacco
      chewing is associated with increased risk of cancer of the oral cavity.
      Smoking increases carbon monoxide (CO) content in blood and reduces
      the concentration of haembound oxygen. This causes oxygen deficiency
      in the body.
          When one buys packets of cigarettes one cannot miss the statutory
      warning that is present on the packing which warns against smoking
      and says how it is injurious to health. Yet, smoking is very prevalent in
      society, both among young and old. Knowing the dangers of smoking
      and chewing tobacco, and its addictive nature, the youth and old need to
      avoid these habits. Any addict requires counselling and medical help to
      get rid of the habit.

      8.5.1 Adolescence and Drug/Alcohol Abuse
      Adolescence means both ‘a period’ and ‘a process’ during which a child
      becomes mature in terms of his/her attitudes and beliefs for effective
      participation in society. The period between 12-18 years of age may
      be thought of as adolescence period. In other words, adolescence is a
      bridge linking childhood and adulthood. Adolescence is accompanied
      by several biological and behavioural changes. Adolescence, thus is a
      very vulnerable phase of mental and psychological development of an
      individual.
          Curiosity, need for adventure and excitement, and experimentation,
      constitute common causes, which motivate youngsters towards drug
      and alcohol use. A child’s natural curiosity motivates him/her to
      experiment. This is complicated further by effects that might be perceived
      as benefits, of alcohol or drug use. Thus, the first use of drugs or alcohol
      may be out of curiosity or experimentation, but later the child starts
      using these to escape facing problems. Of late, stress, from pressures to
      excel in academics or examinations, has played a significant role in
      persuading the youngsters to try alcohol and drugs. The perception
160   among youth that it is ‘cool’ or progressive to smoke, use drugs or
      alcohol, is also in a way a major cause for youth to start these habits.
      Television, movies, newspapers, internet also help to promote this
      perception. Other factors that have been seen to be associated with drug
      and alcohol abuse among adolescents are unstable or unsupportive
      family structures and peer pressure.
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


8.5.2 Addiction and Dependence
Because of the perceived benefits, drugs are frequently used repeatedly.
The most important thing, which one fails to realise, is the inherent
addictive nature of alcohol and drugs. Addiction is a psychological
attachment to certain effects – such as euphoria and a temporary feeling
of well-being – associated with drugs and alcohol. These drive people to
take them even when these are not needed, or even when their use becomes
self-destructive. With repeated use of drugs, the tolerance level of the
receptors present in our body increases. Consequently the receptors
respond only to higher doses of drugs or alcohol leading to greater intake
and addiction. However, it should be clearly borne in mind that use of
these drugs even once, can be a fore-runner to addiction. Thus, the
addictive potential of drugs and alcohol, pull the user into a vicious circle
leading to their regular use (abuse) from which he/she may not be able
to get out. In the absence of any guidance or counselling, the person gets
addicted and becomes dependent on their use.
    Dependence is the tendency of the body to manifest a characteristic
and unpleasant withdrawal syndrome if regular dose of drugs/alcohol
is abruptly discontinued. This is characterised by anxiety, shakiness,
nausea and sweating, which may be relieved when use is resumed again.
In some cases, withdrawal symptoms can be severe and even life
threatening and the person may need medical supervision.
    Dependence leads the patient to ignore all social norms in order to
get sufficient funds to satiate his/her needs. These result in many social
adjustment problems.

8.5.3 Effects of Drug/Alcohol Abuse
The immediate adverse effects of drugs and alcohol abuse are manifested
in the form of reckless behaviour, vandalism and violence. Excessive
doses of drugs may lead to coma and death due to respiratory failure,
heart failure or cerebral hemorrhage. A combination of drugs or their
intake along with alcohol generally results in overdosing and even
deaths. The most common warning signs of drug and alcohol abuse
among youth include drop in academic performance, unexplained
absence from school/college, lack of interest in personal hygiene,
withdrawal, isolation, depression, fatigue, aggressive and rebellious
behaviour, deteriorating relationships with family and friends, loss of
interest in hobbies, change in sleeping and eating habits, fluctuations
in weight, appetite, etc.                                                       161
    There may even be some far-reaching implications of drug/alcohol
abuse. If an abuser is unable to get money to buy drugs/alcohol he/she
may turn to stealing. The adverse effects are just not restricted to the
person who is using drugs or alcohol. At times, a drug/alcohol addict
becomes the cause of mental and financial distress to his/her entire family
and friends.
                                                                         BIOLOGY


           Those who take drugs intravenously (direct injection into the vein
      using a needle and syringe), are much more likely to acquire serious
      infections like AIDS and Hepatitis B. The viruses, which are responsible
      for these diseases, are transferred from one person to another by sharing
      of infected needles and syringes. Both AIDS and Hepatitis B infections
      are chronic infections and ultimately fatal. Both can be transmitted
      through sexual contact or infected blood.
           The use of alcohol during adolescence may also have long-term effects.
      It could lead to heavy drinking in adulthood. The chronic use of drugs and
      alcohol damages nervous system and liver (cirrhosis). The use of drugs
      and alcohol during pregnancy is also known to adversely affect the foetus.
           Another misuse of drugs is what certain sportspersons do to enhance
      their performance. They (mis)use narcotic analgesics, anabolic steroids,
      diuretics and certain hormones in sports to increase muscle strength and
      bulk and to promote aggressiveness and as a result increase athletic
      performance. The side-effects of the use of anabolic steroids in females
      include masculinisation (features like males), increased aggressiveness,
      mood swings, depression, abnormal menstrual cycles, excessive hair
      growth on the face and body, enlargement of clitoris, deepening of voice.
      In males it includes acne, increased aggressiveness, mood swings,
      depression, reduction of size of the testicles, decreased sperm production,
      potential for kidney and liver dysfunction, breast enlargement, premature
      baldness, enlargement of the prostate gland. These effects may be
      permanent with prolonged use. In the adolescent male or female, severe
      facial and body acne, and premature closure of the growth centres of the
      long bones may result in stunted growth.

      8.5.4 Prevention and Control
      The age-old adage of ‘prevention is better than cure’ holds true here also.
      It is also true that habits such as smoking, taking drug or alcohol are
      more likely to be taken up at a young age, more during adolescence.
      Hence, it is best to identify the situations that may push an adolescent
      towards use of drugs or alcohol, and to take remedial measures well in
      time. In this regard, the parents and the teachers have a special
      responsibility. Parenting that combines with high levels of nurturance
      and consistent discipline, has been associated with lowered risk of
      substance (alcohol/drugs/tobacco) abuse. Some of the measures
      mentioned here would be particularly useful for prevention and control
162   of alcohol and drugs abuse among adolescents
        (i) Avoid undue peer pressure - Every child has his/her own choice
            and personality, which should be respected and nurtured. A child
            should not be pushed unduly to perform beyond his/her threshold
            limits; be it studies, sports or other activities.
HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE


 (ii) Education and counselling - Educating and counselling him/
      her to face problems and stresses, and to accept disappointments
      and failures as a part of life. It would also be worthwhile to channelise
      the child’s energy into healthy pursuits like sports, reading, music,
      yoga and other extracurricular activities.
(iii) Seeking help from parents and peers - Help from parents and
      peers should be sought immediately so that they can guide
      appropriately. Help may even be sought from close and trusted
      friends. Besides getting proper advise to sort out their problems,
      this would help young to vent their feelings of anxiety and guilt.
(iv) Looking for danger signs - Alert parents and teachers need to
      look for and identify the danger signs discussed above. Even friends,
      if they find someone using drugs or alcohol, should not hesitate to
      bring this to the notice of parents or teacher in the best interests of
      the person concerned. Appropriate measures would then be required
      to diagnose the malady and the underlying causes. This would help
      in initiating proper remedial steps or treatment.
 (v) Seeking professional and medical help - A lot of help is available
      in the form of highly qualified psychologists, psychiatrists, and de-
      addiction and rehabilitation programmes to help individuals who
      have unfortunately got in the quagmire of drug/alcohol abuse. With
      such help, the affected individual with sufficient efforts and will power,
      can get rid of the problem completely and lead a perfectly normal
      and healthy life.


                                 SUMMARY

   Health is not just the absence of disease. It is a state of complete physical,
   mental, social and psychological well-being. Diseases like typhoid,
   cholera, pneumonia, fungal infections of skin, malaria and many others
   are a major cause of distress to human beings. Vector-borne diseases
   like malaria especially one caused by Plasmodium falciparum, if not
   treated, may prove fatal. Besides personal cleanliness and hygiene,
   public health measures like proper disposal of waste, decontamination
   of drinking water, control of vectors like mosquitoes and immunisation
   are very helpful in preventing these diseases. Our immune system plays
   the major role in preventing these diseases when we are exposed to
   disease-causing agents. The innate defences of our body like skin,
   mucous membranes, antimicrobial substances present in our tears,
   saliva and the phagocytic cells help to block the entry of pathogens
                                                                                    163
   into our body. If the pathogens succeed in gaining entry to our body,
   specific antibodies (humoral immune response) and cells (cell mediated
   immune response) serve to kill these pathogens. Immune system has
   memory. On subsequent exposure to same pathogen, the immune
   response is rapid and more intense. This forms the basis of protection
                                                                            BIOLOGY



       afforded by vaccination and immunisation. Among other diseases, AIDS
       and cancer kill a large number of individuals worldwide. AIDS caused
       by the human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) is fatal but can be
       prevented if certain precautions are taken. Many cancers are curable if
       detected early and appropriate therapeutic measures are taken. Of late,
       drug and alcohol abuse among youth and adolescents is becoming
       another cause of concern. Because of the addictive nature of alcohol
       and drugs, and their perceived benefits like relief from stress, a person
       may try taking these in the face of peer pressure, examinations-related
       and competition-related stresses. In doing so, he/she may get addicted
       to them. Education about their harmful effects, counselling and seeking
       immediate professional and medical help would totally relieve the
       individual from these evils.




                             EXERCISES
       1.   What are the various public health measures, which you would suggest
            as safeguard against infectious diseases?
       2.   In which way has the study of biology helped us to control infectious
            diseases?
       3.   How does the transmission of each of the following diseases take place?
            (a) Amoebiasis       (b) Malaria      (c) Ascariasis      (d) Pneumonia
       4.   What measure would you take to prevent water-borne diseases?
       5.   Discuss with your teacher what does ‘a suitable gene’ means, in the
            context of DNA vaccines.
       6.   Name the primary and secondary lymphoid organs.
       7.   The following are some well-known abbreviations, which have been
            used in this chapter. Expand each one to its full form:
            (a) MALT             (b) CMI          (c) AIDS            (d) NACO
            (e) HIV
       8.   Differentiate the following and give examples of each:
            (a) Innate and acquired immunity          (b) Active and passive immunity
       9.   Draw a well-labelled diagram of an antibody molecule.
      10.   What are the various routes by which transmission of human immuno-
            deficiency virus takes place?
      11.   What is the mechanism by which the AIDS virus causes deficiency of
            immune system of the infected person?
      12.   How is a cancerous cell different from a normal cell?
      13.   Explain what is meant by metastasis.
164   14.   List the harmful effects caused by alcohol/drug abuse.
      15.   Do you think that friends can influence one to take alcohol/drugs? If
            yes, how may one protect himself/herself from such an influence?
      16.   Why is that once a person starts taking alcohol or drugs, it is difficult
            to get rid of this habit? Discuss it with your teacher.
      17.   In your view what motivates youngsters to take to alcohol or drugs and
            how can this be avoided?
CHAPTER 12

BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS
APPLICATIONS

12.1 Biotechnological
     Applications in
     Agriculture          Biotechnology, as you would have learnt from the
                          previous chapter, essentially deals with industrial scale
12.2 Biotechnological     production of biopharmaceuticals and biologicals using
     Applications in      genetically modified microbes, fungi, plants and animals.
     Medicine             The applications of biotechnology include therapeutics,
12.3 Transgenic Animals   diagnostics, genetically modified crops for agriculture,
                          processed food, bioremediation, waste treatment, and
12.4 Ethical Issues
                          energy production. Three critical research areas of
                          biotechnology are:
                             (i) Providing the best catalyst in the form of improved
                                 organism usually a microbe or pure enzyme.
                            (ii) Creating optimal conditions through engineering for
                                 a catalyst to act, and
                           (iii) Downstream processing technologies to purify the
                                 protein/organic compound.
                               Let us now learn how human beings have used
                          biotechnology to improve the quality of human life,
                          especially in the field of food production and health.

                          12.1 B IOTECHNOLOGICAL A PPLICATIONS                    IN
                               AGRICULTURE
                          Let us take a look at the three options that can be thought
                          for increasing food production
                             (i) agro-chemical based agriculture;
                                                                           BIOLOGY


         (ii) organic agriculture; and
        (iii) genetically engineered crop-based agriculture.
            The Green Revolution succeeded in tripling the food supply but yet
      it was not enough to feed the growing human population. Increased yields
      have partly been due to the use of improved crop varieties, but mainly
      due to the use of better management practices and use of agrochemicals
      (fertilisers and pesticides). However, for farmers in the developing world,
      agrochemicals are often too expensive, and further increases in yield with
      existing varieties are not possible using conventional breeding. Is there
      any alternative path that our understanding of genetics can show so that
      farmers may obtain maximum yield from their fields? Is there a way to
      minimise the use of fertilisers and chemicals so that their harmful effects
      on the environment are reduced? Use of genetically modified crops is a
      possible solution.
            Plants, bacteria, fungi and animals whose genes have been altered by
      manipulation are called Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO). GM
      plants have been useful in many ways. Genetic modification has:
         (i) made crops more tolerant to abiotic stresses (cold, drought, salt,
             heat).
        (ii) reduced reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
       (iii) helped to reduce post harvest losses.
       (iv) increased efficiency of mineral usage by plants (this prevents early
             exhaustion of fertility of soil).
        (v) enhanced nutritional value of food, e.g., Vitamin ‘A’ enriched rice.
          In addition to these uses, GM has been used to create tailor-made
      plants to supply alternative resources to industries, in the form of starches,
      fuels and pharmaceuticals.
          Some of the applications of biotechnology in agriculture that you will
      study in detail are the production of pest resistant plants, which could
      decrease the amount of pesticide used. Bt toxin is produced by a
      bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt for short). Bt toxin gene has
      been cloned from the bacteria and been expressed in plants to provide
      resistance to insects without the need for insecticides; in effect created a
      bio-pesticide. Examples are Bt cotton, Bt corn, rice, tomato, potato and
      soyabean etc.
      Bt Cotton: Some strains of Bacillus thuringiensis produce proteins that
      kill certain insects such as lepidopterans (tobacco budworm, armyworm),
      coleopterans (beetles) and dipterans (flies, mosquitoes). B. thuringiensis
208   forms protein crystals during a particular phase of their growth. These
      crystals contain a toxic insecticidal protein. Why does this toxin not kill
      the Bacillus? Actually, the Bt toxin protein exist as inactive protoxins but
      once an insect ingest the inactive toxin, it is converted into an active form
      of toxin due to the alkaline pH of the gut which solubilise the crystals.
      The activated toxin binds to the surface of midgut epithelial cells and
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS


create pores that cause cell swelling and lysis and eventually cause death
of the insect.
    Specific Bt toxin genes were isolated from Bacillus thuringiensis and
incorporated into the several crop plants such as cotton (Figure 12.1).
The choice of genes depends upon the crop and the targeted pest, as
most Bt toxins are insect-group specific. The toxin is coded by a gene
named cry. There are a number of them, for example, the proteins encoded
by the genes cryIAc and cryIIAb control the cotton bollworms, that of
cryIAb controls corn borer.




                            (a)



                                                        (b)




Figure 12.1 Cotton boll: (a) destroyed by bollworms; (b) a fully mature
            cotton boll


Pest Resistant Plants: Several nematodes parasitise a wide variety of
plants and animals including human beings. A nematode Meloidegyne
incognitia infects the roots of tobacco plants and causes a great reduction
in yield. A novel strategy was adopted to prevent this infestation which
was based on the process of RNA interference (RNAi). RNAi takes place
in all eukaryotic organisms as a method of cellular defense. This method
involves silencing of a specific mRNA due to a complementary dsRNA
molecule that binds to and prevents translation of the mRNA (silencing).
The source of this complementary RNA could be from an infection by
viruses having RNA genomes or mobile genetic elements (transposons)
that replicate via an RNA intermediate.                                       209
    Using Agrobacterium vectors, nematode-specific genes were
introduced into the host plant (Figure 12.2). The introduction of DNA
was such that it produced both sense and anti-sense RNA in the host
cells. These two RNA’s being complementary to each other formed a double
stranded (dsRNA) that initiated RNAi and thus, silenced the specific mRNA
                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                        of the nematode. The consequence was that the parasite could not survive
                        in a transgenic host expressing specific interfering RNA. The transgenic
                        plant therefore got itself protected from the parasite (Figure 12.2).



               (a)                                  (b)




Figure 12.2 Host plant-generated dsRNA triggers protection against nematode infestation:
            (a) Roots of a typical control plants; (b) transgenic plant roots 5 days after deliberate
            infection of nematode but protected through novel mechanism.



                         12.2 BIOTECHNOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS                 IN   MEDICINE
                         The recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense impact
                         in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe and more
                         effective therapeutic drugs. Further, the recombinant therapeutics do not
                         induce unwanted immunological responses as is common in case of
                         similar products isolated from non-human sources. At present, about
                         30 recombinant therapeutics have been approved for human-use the
                         world over. In India, 12 of these are presently being marketed.

                         12.2.1 Genetically Engineered Insulin
                         Management of adult-onset diabetes is possible by taking insulin at
                         regular time intervals. What would a diabetic patient do if enough
                         human-insulin was not available? If you discuss this, you would soon
                         realise that one would have to isolate and use insulin from other animals.
                         Would the insulin isolated from other animals be just as effective as
                         that secreted by the human body itself and would it not elicit an immune
210
                         response in the human body? Now, imagine if bacterium were available
                         that could make human insulin. Suddenly the whole process becomes
                         so simple. You can easily grow a large quantity of the bacteria and make
                         as much insulin as you need.
                             Think about whether insulin can be orally administered to diabetic
                         people or not. Why?
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS


    Insulin used for diabetes was earlier extracted from
pancreas of slaughtered cattle and pigs. Insulin from an
animal source, though caused some patients to develop
allergy or other types of reactions to the foreign
protein. Insulin consists of two short polypeptide
chains: chain A and chain B, that are linked together by
disulphide bridges (Figure 12.3). In mammals, including
humans, insulin is synthesised as a pro-hormone (like a
pro-enzyme, the pro-hormone also needs to be processed
before it becomes a fully mature and functional hormone)
which contains an extra stretch called the C peptide.
This C peptide is not present in the mature insulin and is Figure 12.3 Maturation of
removed during maturation into insulin.The main                        pro-insulin into insulin
challenge for production of insulin using rDNA techniques              (simplified)
was getting insulin assembled into a mature form. In
1983, Eli Lilly an American company prepared two DNA sequences
corresponding to A and B, chains of human insulin and introduced them
in plasmids of E. coli to produce insulin chains. Chains A and B were
produced separately, extracted and combined by creating disulfide bonds
to form human insulin.

12.2.2 Gene Therapy
If a person is born with a hereditary disease, can a corrective therapy
be taken for such a disease? Gene therapy is an attempt to do this.
Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a
gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/embryo. Here genes
are inserted into a person’s cells and tissues to treat a disease.
Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into
the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate
for the non-functional gene.
     The first clinical gene therapy was given in 1990 to a 4-year old girl
with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. This enzyme is crucial for
the immune system to function. The disorder is caused due to the deletion
of the gene for adenosine deaminase. In some children ADA deficiency
can be cured by bone marrow transplantation; in others it can be treated
by enzyme replacement therapy, in which functional ADA is given to the
patient by injection. But the problem with both of these approaches that
they are not completely curative. As a first step towards gene therapy,
lymphocytes from the blood of the patient are grown in a culture outside
the body. A functional ADA cDNA (using a retroviral vector) is then
                                                                                           211
introduced into these lymphocytes, which are subsequently returned to
the patient. However, as these cells are not immortal, the patient requires
periodic infusion of such genetically engineered lymphocytes. However, if
the gene isolate from marrow cells producing ADA is introduced into cells
at early embryonic stages, it could be a permanent cure.
                                                                          BIOLOGY


      12.2.3 Molecular Diagnosis
      You know that for effective treatment of a disease, early diagnosis and
      understanding its pathophysiology is very important. Using conventional
      methods of diagnosis (serum and urine analysis, etc.) early detection is
      not possible. Recombinant DNA technology, Polymerase Chain Reaction
      (PCR) and Enzyme Linked Immuno-sorbent Assay (ELISA) are some of
      the techniques that serve the purpose of early diagnosis.
          Presence of a pathogen (bacteria, viruses, etc.) is normally suspected
      only when the pathogen has produced a disease symptom. By this time
      the concentration of pathogen is already very high in the body. However,
      very low concentration of a bacteria or virus (at a time when the symptoms
      of the disease are not yet visible) can be detected by amplification of their
      nucleic acid by PCR. Can you explain how PCR can detect very low
      amounts of DNA? PCR is now routinely used to detect HIV in suspected
      AIDS patients. It is being used to detect mutations in genes in suspected
      cancer patients too. It is a powerful techqnique to identify many other
      genetic disorders.
          A single stranded DNA or RNA, tagged with a radioactive molecule
      (probe) is allowed to hybridise to its complementary DNA in a clone of
      cells followed by detection using autoradiography. The clone having the
      mutated gene will hence not appear on the photographic film, because
      the probe will not have complementarity with the mutated gene.
          ELISA is based on the principle of antigen-antibody interaction.
      Infection by pathogen can be detected by the presence of antigens
      (proteins, glycoproteins, etc.) or by detecting the antibodies synthesised
      against the pathogen.

      12.3 TRANSGENIC ANIMALS
      Animals that have had their DNA manipulated to possess and express an
      extra (foreign) gene are known as transgenic animals. Transgenic rats,
      rabbits, pigs, sheep, cows and fish have been produced, although over
      95 per cent of all existing transgenic animals are mice. Why are these
      animals being produced? How can man benefit from such modifications?
      Let us try and explore some of the common reasons:
         (i) Normal physiology and development: Transgenic animals can
             be specifically designed to allow the study of how genes are
             regulated, and how they affect the normal functions of the body
             and its development, e.g., study of complex factors involved in growth
212          such as insulin-like growth factor. By introducing genes from other
             species that alter the formation of this factor and studying the
             biological effects that result, information is obtained about the
             biological role of the factor in the body.
        (ii) Study of disease: Many transgenic animals are designed to increase
             our understanding of how genes contribute to the development of
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS


      disease. These are specially made to serve as models for human
      diseases so that investigation of new treatments for diseases is made
      possible. Today transgenic models exist for many human diseases
      such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s.
 (iii) Biological products: Medicines required to treat certain human
       diseases can contain biological products, but such products are
       often expensive to make. Transgenic animals that produce useful
       biological products can be created by the introduction of the portion
       of DNA (or genes) which codes for a particular product such as
       human protein (α-1-antitrypsin) used to treat emphysema. Similar
       attempts are being made for treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU)
       and cystic fibrosis. In 1997, the first transgenic cow, Rosie, produced
       human protein-enriched milk (2.4 grams per litre). The milk
       contained the human alpha-lactalbumin and was nutritionally a
       more balanced product for human babies than natural cow-milk.
 (iv) Vaccine safety: Transgenic mice are being developed for use in
      testing the safety of vaccines before they are used on humans.
      Transgenic mice are being used to test the safety of the polio vaccine.
      If successful and found to be reliable, they could replace the use of
      monkeys to test the safety of batches of the vaccine.
  (v) Chemical safety testing: This is known as toxicity/safety testing.
      The procedure is the same as that used for testing toxicity of drugs.
      Transgenic animals are made that carry genes which make them more
      sensitive to toxic substances than non-transgenic animals. They are
      then exposed to the toxic substances and the effects studied. Toxicity
      testing in such animals will allow us to obtain results in less time.

12.4 ETHICAL ISSUES
The manipulation of living organisms by the human race cannot go on
any further, without regulation. Some ethical standards are required to
evaluate the morality of all human activities that might help or harm living
organisms.
    Going beyond the morality of such issues, the biological significance
of such things is also important. Genetic modification of organisms can
have unpredicatable results when such organisms are introduced into
the ecosystem.
    Therefore, the Indian Government has set up organisations such as
GEAC (Genetic Engineering Approval Committee), which will make                   213
decisions regarding the validity of GM research and the safety of
introducing GM-organisms for public services.
    The modification/usage of living organisms for public services (as food
and medicine sources, for example) has also created problems with patents
granted for the same.
                                                                         BIOLOGY


          There is growing public anger that certain companies are being
      granted patents for products and technologies that make use of the
      genetic materials, plants and other biological resources that have long
      been identified, developed and used by farmers and indigenous people
      of a specific region/country.
          Rice is an important food grain, the presence of which goes back
      thousands of years in Asia’s agricultural history. There are an estimated
      200,000 varieties of rice in India alone. The diversity of rice in India is
      one of the richest in the world. Basmati rice is distinct for its unique
      aroma and flavour and 27 documented varieties of Basmati are grown
      in India. There is reference to Basmati in ancient texts, folklore and
      poetry, as it has been grown for centuries. In 1997, an American
      company got patent rights on Basmati rice through the US Patent and
      Trademark Office. This allowed the company to sell a ‘new’ variety of
      Basmati, in the US and abroad. This ‘new’ variety of Basmati had actually
      been derived from Indian farmer’s varieties. Indian Basmati was crossed
      with semi-dwarf varieties and claimed as an invention or a novelty. The
      patent extends to functional equivalents, implying that other people
      selling Basmati rice could be restricted by the patent. Several attempts
      have also been made to patent uses, products and processes based on
      Indian traditional herbal medicines, e.g., turmeric neem. If we are not
      vigilant and we do not immediately counter these patent applications,
      other countries/individuals may encash on our rich legacy and we may
      not be able to do anything about it.
          Biopiracy is the term used to refer to the use of bio-resources by
      multinational companies and other organisations without proper
      authorisation from the countries and people concerned without
      compensatory payment.
          Most of the industrialised nations are rich financially but poor in
      biodiversity and traditional knowledge. In contrast the developing and
      the underdeveloped world is rich in biodiversity and traditional
      knowledge related to bio-resources. Traditional knowledge related to
      bio-resources can be exploited to develop modern applications and can
      also be used to save time, effort and expenditure during their
      commercialisation.
          There has been growing realisation of the injustice, inadequate
      compensation and benefit sharing between developed and developing
      countries. Therefore, some nations are developing laws to prevent such
214   unauthorised exploitation of their bio-resources and traditional
      knowledge.
          The Indian Parliament has recently cleared the second amendment
      of the Indian Patents Bill, that takes such issues into consideration,
      including patent terms emergency provisions and research and
      development initiative.
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS




                                 SUMMARY
  Biotechnology has given to humans several useful products by using
  microbes, plant, animals and their metabolic machinery. Recombinant
  DNA technology has made it possible to engineer microbes, plants
  and animals such that they have novel capabilities. Genetically
  Modified Organisms have been created by using methods other than
  natural methods to transfer one or more genes from one organism to
  another, generally using techniques such as recombinant DNA
  technology.
      GM plants have been useful in increasing crop yields, reduce post-
  harvest losses and make crops more tolerant of stresses. There are
  several GM crop plants with improved nutritional value of foods and
  reduced the reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
      Recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense
  impact in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe
  and more effective therapeutics. Since the recombinant therapeutics
  are identical to human proteins, they do not induce unwanted
  immunological responses and are free from risk of infection as was
  observed in case of similar products isolated from non-human sources.
  Human insulin is made in bacteria yet its structure is absolutely
  identical to that of the natural molecule.
      Transgenic animals are also used to understand how genes
  contribute to the development of a disease by serving as models for
  human diseases, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis
  and Alzheimer’s.
      Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an individual’s cells
  and tissues to treat diseases especially hereditary diseases. It does
  so by replacing a defective mutant allele with a functional one or
  gene targeting which involves gene amplification. Viruses that attack
  their hosts and introduce their genetic material into the host cell as
  part of their replication cycle are used as vectors to transfer healthy
  genes or more recently portions of genes.
      The current interest in the manipulation of microbes, plants, and
  animals has raised serious ethical questions.




                          EXERCISES
 1.   Crystals of Bt toxin produced by some bacteria do not kill the bacteria
      themselves because –
      (a) bacteria are resistant to the toxin
      (b) toxin is immature;                                                    215
      (c)   toxin is inactive;
      (d) bacteria encloses toxin in a special sac.
 2.   What are transgenic bacteria? Illustrate using any one example.
 3.   Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of production
      of genetically modified crops.
                                                                        BIOLOGY


      4.   What are Cry proteins? Name an organism that produce it. How has
           man exploited this protein to his benefit?
      5.   What is gene therapy? Illustrate using the example of adenosine
           deaminase (ADA) deficiency.
      6.   Digrammatically represent the experimental steps in cloning and
           expressing an human gene (say the gene for growth hormone) into a
           bacterium like E. coli ?
      7.   Can you suggest a method to remove oil (hydrocarbon) from seeds based
           on your understanding of rDNA technology and chemistry of oil?
      8.   Find out from internet what is golden rice.
      9.   Does our blood have proteases and nucleases?
      10. Consult internet and find out how to make orally active protein
          pharmaceutical. What is the major problem to be encountered?




216
CHAPTER 16

ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


 16.1 Air Pollution and Its
      Control
                                 Human population size has grown enormously over the
 16.2 Water Pollution and Its    last hundred years. This means increase in demand for
      Control                    food, water, home, electricity, roads, automobiles and
                                 numerous other commodities. These demands are exerting
 16.3 Solid Wastes
                                 tremendous pressure on our natural resources, and are
 16.4 Agro-chemicals and         also contributing to pollution of air, water and soil. The
      their Effects              need of the hour is to check the degradation and depletion
 16.5 Radioactive Wastes         of our precious natural resources and pollution without
                                 halting the process of development.
 16.6 Greenhouse Effect and          Pollution is any undesirable change in physical,
      Global Warming             chemical or biological characteristics of air, land, water or
 16.7 Ozone Depletion in the     soil. Agents that bring about such an undesirable change
      Stratosphere               are called as pollutants. In order to control environmental
                                 pollution, the Government of India has passed the
 16.8 Degradation by Improper
                                 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to protect
      Resource Utilisation and
                                 and improve the quality of our environment (air, water
      Maintenance
                                 and soil).
 16.9 Deforestation
                                 16.1 AIR POLLUTION          AND ITS   CONTROL
                                 We are dependent on air for our respiratory needs. Air
                                 pollutants cause injury to all living organisms. They
                                 reduce growth and yield of crops and cause premature
                                 death of plants. Air pollutants also deleteriously affect the
                                 respiratory system of humans and of animals. Harmful
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


effects depend on the concentration of pollutants, duration of exposure
and the organism.
     Smokestacks of thermal power plants, smelters and other industries
release particulate and gaseous air pollutants together with harmless
gases, such as nitrogen, oxygen, etc. These pollutants must be separated/
filtered out before releasing the harmless gases into the atmosphere.




                             Figure 16.1 Electrostatic precipitator


    There are several ways of removing particulate matter; the most widely
used of which is the electrostatic precipitator (Figure 16.1), which can
remove over 99 per cent particulate matter present in the exhaust from a
thermal power plant. It has electrode wires that are maintained at several
thousand volts, which produce a corona that releases electrons. These
electrons attach to dust particles giving them a net negative charge. The
collecting plates are grounded and attract the charged dust particles.
The velocity of air between the plates must be low enough to allow the
dust to fall. A scrubber (Figure 16.1) can remove gases like sulphur
dioxide. In a scrubber, the exhaust is passed through a spray of water or
lime. Recently we have realised the dangers of particulate matter that are   271
very very small and are not removed by these precipitators. According to
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), particulate size 2.5 micrometers
or less in diameter (PM 2.5) are responsible for causing the greatest harm
to human health. These fine particulates can be inhaled deep into the
lungs and can cause breathing and respiratory symptoms, irritation,
inflammations and damage to the lungs and premature deaths.
                                                                        BIOLOGY


          Automobiles are a major cause for atmospheric pollution atleast in
      the metro cities. As the number of vehicles increase on the streets, this
      problem is now shifting to the other cities too. Proper maintenance of
      automobiles along with use of lead-free petrol or diesel can reduce the
      pollutants they emit. Catalytic converters, having expensive metals namely
      platinum-palladium and rhodium as the catalysts, are fitted into
      automobiles for reducing emission of poisonous gases. As the exhaust
      passes through the catalytic converter, unburnt hydrocarbons are
      converted into carbon dioxide and water, and carbon monoxide and nitric
      oxide are changed to carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas, respectively. Motor
      vehicles equipped with catalytic converter should use unleaded petrol
      because lead in the petrol inactivates the catalyst.
          In India, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act came
      into force in 1981, but was amended in 1987 to include noise as an air
      pollutant. Noise is undesired high level of sound. We have got used to
      associating loud sounds with pleasure and entertainment not realising
      that noise causes psychological and physiological disorders in humans.
      The bigger the city, the bigger the function, the greater the noise!! A
      brief exposure to extremely high sound level, 150 dB or more generated
      by take off of a jet plane or rocket, may damage ear drums thus
      permanently impairing hearing ability. Even chronic exposure to a
      relatively lower noise level of cities may permanently damage hearing
      abilities of humans. Noise also causes sleeplessness, increased heart
      beat, altered breathing pattern, thus considerably stressing humans.
          Considering the many dangerous effects of noise pollution can you
      identify the unnecessary sources of noise pollution around you which
      can be reduced immediately without any financial loss to anybody?
      Reduction of noise in our industries can be affected by use of sound-
      absorbent materials or by muffling noise. Stringent following of laws laid
      down in relation to noise like delimitation of horn-free zones around
      hospitals and schools, permissible sound-levels of crackers and of loud-
      speakers, timings after which loudspeakers cannot be played, etc., need
      to be enforced to protect ourselves from noise pollution.

      16.1.1 Controlling Vehicular Air Pollution: A Case
             Study of Delhi
      With its very large population of vehicular traffic, Delhi leads the coun-
      try in its levels of air-pollution – it has more cars than the states of
      Gujarat and West Bengal put together. In the 1990s, Delhi ranked
      fourth among the 41 most polluted cities of the world. Air pollution
      problems in Delhi became so serious that a public interest litigation
272   (PIL) was filed in the Supreme Court of India. After being censured very
      strongly by the Supreme Court, under its directives, the government
      was asked to take, within a specified time period, appropriate meas-
      ures, including switching over the entire fleet of public transport, i.e.,
      buses, from diesel to compressed natural gas (CNG). All the buses of
      Delhi were converted to run on CNG by the end of 2002. You may ask
      the question as to why CNG is better than diesel. The answer is that
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


CNG burns most efficiently, unlike petrol or diesel, in the automobiles
and very little of it is left unburnt. Moreover, CNG is cheaper than petrol
or diesel, cannot be siphoned off by thieves and adulterated like petrol
or diesel. The main problem with switching over to CNG is the difficulty
of laying down pipelines to deliver CNG through distribution points/
pumps and ensuring uninterrupted supply. Simultaneously parallel
steps taken in Delhi for reducing vehicular pollution include phasing
out of old vehicles, use of unleaded petrol, use of low-sulphur petrol
and diesel, use of catalytic converters in vehicles, application of stringent
pollution-level norms for vehicles, etc.
    The Government of India through a new auto fuel policy has laid
out a roadmap to cut down vehicular pollution in Indian cities. More
stringent norms for fuels means steadily reducing the sulphur and
aromatic content in petrol and diesel fuels. Euro III norms, for example,
stipulate that sulphur be controlled at 350 parts-per-million (ppm) in
diesel and 150 ppm in petrol. Aromatic hydrocarbons are to be contained
at 42 per cent of the concerned fuel. The goal, according to the roadmap,
is to reduce sulphur to 50 ppm in petrol and diesel and bring down the
level to 35 per cent. Corresponding to the fuel, vehicle engines will also
need to be upgraded.
    Mass Emission Standards (Bharat Stage II which is equivalent to Euro-
II norms) are no more applicable in any of the cities of India. Details of the
latest Mass Emission Standards in India are provided below (Table 16.1)
   Table 16.1: Table Showing the Mass Emission Standards in India
 Type of Vehicles      Norms                  Cities of Implementation

 4 Wheelers            Bharat Stage III       Throughout the country
                                              since October 2010
 4 Wheelers            Bharat Stage IV        13 Mega cities (Delhi and
                                              NCR, Mumbai, Kolkata,
                                              Chennai, Bangalore, Surat,
                                              Kanpur, Agra, Lucknow and
                                              Sholapur) since April, 2010
 3 Wheelers            Bharat Stage III       Throughout the country
                                              since October 2010
 2 Wheelers            Bharat Stage III       Throughout the country
                                              since October 2010
    Thanks to the efforts made, the air quality of Delhi has significantly
improved. According to an estimate, a substantial fall in CO2 and SO2
level has been found in Delhi between 1997 and 2005.

16.2 WATER POLLUTION             AND ITS   CONTROL
                                                                                 273
Human beings have been abusing the water-bodies around the world by
disposing into them all kinds of waste. We tend to believe that water can
wash away everything not taking cognizance of the fact that the water
bodies are our lifeline as well as that of all other living organisms. Can
you list what all we tend to try and wash away through our rivers and
drains? Due to such activities of human kind, the ponds, lakes, stream,
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                  rivers, estuaries and oceans are becoming polluted in several parts of the
                  world. Realising the importance of maintaining the cleanliness of the water
                  bodies, the Government of India has passed the Water (Prevention and
                  Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to safeguard our water resources.

                  16.2.1 Domestic Sewage and Industrial Effluents
                  As we work with water in our homes in the cities and towns, we wash
                                                       everything into drains. Have you
                                                       ever wondered where the sewage
                                                       that comes out of our houses go?
                                                       What happens in villages? Is the
                                                       sewage treated before being
                                                       transported to the nearest river
                                                       and mixed with it? A mere 0.1
                                                       per cent impurities make
                                                       domestic sewage unfit for human
                                                       use (Figure 16.2). You have read
                                                       about sewage treatment
                                                       plants in Chapter 10. Solids are
      Figure 16.2 Composition of waste water           relatively easy to remove, what
                                                       is most difficult to remove are




274




        Figure 16.3 Effect of sewage discharge on some important characteristics of a river
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


dissolved salts such as nitrates, phosphates, and other nutrients, and
toxic metal ions and organic compounds. Domestic sewage primarily
contains biodegradable organic matter, which readily decomposes –
thanks to bacteria and other micro-organisms, which can multiply using
these organic substances as substrates and hence utilise some of the
components of sewage. It is possible to estimate the amount of
biodegradable organic matter in sewage water by measuring Biochemical
Oxygen Demand (BOD). Can you explain how? In the chapter on micro-
organisms you have read about the relation between BOD, micro-
organisms and the amount of biodegradable matter.
    Figure 16.3 shows some of the changes that one may notice following
discharge of sewage into a river. Micro-organisms involved in
biodegradation of organic matter in the receiving water body consume a
lot of oxygen, and as a result there is a sharp decline in dissolved oxygen
downstream from the point of sewage discharge. This causes mortality of
fish and other aquatic creatures.
    Presence of large amounts of nutrients in waters also causes excessive
growth of planktonic (free-floating) algae, called an algal bloom
(Figure 16.4) which imparts a distinct colour to the water bodies. Algal
blooms cause deterioration of the water quality and fish mortality. Some
bloom-forming algae are extremely toxic to human beings and animals.
    You may have seen the beautiful mauve-colored flowers found on
very appealingly-shaped floating plants in water bodies. These plants
which were introduced into India for their lovely flowers have caused havoc
by their excessive growth by causing blocks in our waterways. They grow
faster than our ability to remove them. These are plants of water hyacinth
(Eichhornia crassipes), the world’s most problematic aquatic weed, also




                                                                              275




               Figure 16.4 Pictorial view of an algal bloom
                                                                                           BIOLOGY


                                    called ‘ Terror of Bengal ’. They grow abundantly in
                                    eutrophic water bodies, and lead to an imbalance in the
                                    ecosystem dynamics of the water body.
                                        Sewage from our homes as well as from hospitals are
                                    likely to contain many undesirable pathogenic micro-
                                    organisms, and its disposal into a water without proper
                                    treatment may cause outbreak of serious diseases, such
                                    as, dysentery, typhoid, jaundice, cholera, etc.
                                        Unlike domestic sewage, waste water from industries
                                    like petroleum, paper manufacturing, metal extraction and
                                    processing, chemical manufacturing, etc., often contain
                                    toxic substances, notably, heavy metals (defined as
                                    elements with density > 5 g/cm3 such as mercury,
                                    cadmium, copper, lead, etc.) and a variety of organic
                                    compounds.
                                        A few toxic substances, often present in industrial
                                    waste waters, can undergo biological magnification
                                    (Biomagnification) in the aquatic food chain.
                                    Biomagnification refers to increase in concentration of
                                    the toxicant at successive trophic levels. This happens
                                    because a toxic substance accumulated by an organism
                                    cannot be metabolised or excreted, and is thus passed on
                                    to the next higher trophic level. This phenomenon is well-
                                    known for mercury and DDT. Figure 16.5 shows
                                    biomagnification of DDT in an aquatic food chain. In this
                                    manner, the concentration of DDT is increased at
                                    successive trophic levels; say if it starts at 0.003 ppb
                                    (ppb = parts per billion) in water, it can ultimately reach
                                    25 ppm (ppm = parts per million) in fish-eating birds,
                                    through biomagnification. High concentrations of DDT
 Figure 16.5 Biomagnification of disturb calcium metabolism in birds, which causes
             DDT in an aquatic thinning of eggshell and their premature breaking,
             food chain             eventually causing decline in bird populations.
                                        Eutrophication is the natural aging of a lake by
                    nutrient enrichment of its water. In a young lake the water is cold and
                    clear, supporting little life. With time, streams draining into the lake
                    introduce nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, which encourage
                    the growth of aquatic organisms. As the lake’s fertility increases, plant
276                 and animal life burgeons, and organic remains begin to be deposited on
                    the lake bottom. Over the centuries, as silt and organic debris pile up, the
                    lake grows shallower and warmer, with warm-water organisms
                    supplanting those that thrive in a cold environment. Marsh plants take
                    root in the shallows and begin to fill in the original lake basin. Eventually,
                    the lake gives way to large masses of floating plants (bog), finally converting
                    into land. Depending on climate, size of the lake and other factors, the
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


natural aging of a lake may span thousands of years. However, pollutants
from man’s activities like effluents from the industries and homes can
radically accelerate the aging process. This phenomenon has been called
Cultural or Accelerated Eutrophication. During the past century, lakes
in many parts of the earth have been severely eutrophied by sewage and
agricultural and industrial wastes. The prime contaminants are nitrates
and phosphates, which act as plant nutrients. They overstimulate the
growth of algae, causing unsightly scum and unpleasant odors, and
robbing the water of dissolved oxygen vital to other aquatic life. At the
same time, other pollutants flowing into a lake may poison whole
populations of fish, whose decomposing remains further deplete the
water’s dissolved oxygen content. In such fashion, a lake can literally
choke to death.
    Heated (thermal) wastewaters flowing out of electricity-generating units,
e.g., thermal power plants, constitute another important category of
pollutants. Thermal wastewater eliminates or reduces the number of
organisms sensitive to high temperature, and may enhance the growth of
plants and fish in extremely cold areas but, only after causing damage to
the indigenous flora and fauna.

16.2.2 A Case Study of Integrated Waste Water Treatment
Wastewater including sewage can be treated in an integrated manner, by
utilising a mix of artificial and natural processes. An example of such an
initiative is the town of Arcata, situated along the northern coast of
California. Collaborating with biologists from the Humboldt
State University, the townspeople created an integrated waste water
treatment process within a natural system. The cleaning occurs in two
stages – (a) the conventional sedimentation, filtering and chlorine
treatments are given. After this stage, lots of dangerous pollutants like
dissolved heavy metals still remain. To combat this, an innovative
approach was taken and (b) the biologists developed a series of six
connected marshes over 60 hectares of marshland. Appropriate plants,
algae, fungi and bacteria were seeded into this area, which neutralise,
absorb and assimilate the pollutants. Hence, as the water flows through
the marshes, it gets purified naturally.
     The marshes also constitute a sanctuary, with a high level of
biodiversity in the form of fishes, animals and birds that now reside there.
A citizens group called Friends of the Arcata Marsh (FOAM) are responsible
for the upkeep and safeguarding of this wonderful project. .                    277
     All this time, we have assumed that removal of wastes requires water,
i.e., the creation of sewage. But what if water is not necessary to dispose
off human waste, like excreta? Can you imagine the amount of water that
one can save if one didn’t have to flush the toilet? Well, this is already a
reality. Ecological sanitation is a sustainable system for handling human
                                                                             BIOLOGY


      excreta, using dry composting toilets. This is a practical, hygienic, efficient
      and cost-effective solution to human waste disposal. The key point to
      note here is that with this composting method, human excreta can be
      recycled into a resource (as natural fertiliser), which reduces the need for
      chemical fertilisers. There are working ‘EcoSan’ toilets in many areas of
      Kerala and Sri Lanka.

      16.3 SOLID WASTES
      Solid wastes refer to everything that goes out in trash. Municipal solid
      wastes are wastes from homes, offices, stores, schools, hospitals, etc.,
      that are collected and disposed by the municipality. The municipal solid
      wastes generally comprise paper, food wastes, plastics, glass, metals,
      rubber, leather, textile, etc. Burning reduces the volume of the wastes,
      although it is generally not burnt to completion and open dumps often
      serve as the breeding ground for rats and flies. Sanitary landfills were
      adopted as the substitute for open-burning dumps. In a sanitary landfill,
      wastes are dumped in a depression or trench after compaction, and
      covered with dirt everyday. If you live in a town or city, do you know
      where the nearest landfill site is? Landfills are also not really much of
      a solution since the amount of garbage generation specially in the metros
      has increased so much that these sites are getting filled too. Also there
      is danger of seepage of chemicals, etc., from these landfills polluting the
      underground water resources.
           A solution to all this can only be in human beings becoming more
      sensitive to these environment issues. All waste that we generate can
      be categorised into three types – (a) bio-degradable, (b) recyclable and
      (c) the non-biodegradable. It is important that all garbage generated is
      sorted. What can be reused or recycled should be separated out; our
      kabadiwallahs and rag-pickers do a great job of separation of materials
      for recycling. The biodegradable materials can be put into deep pits in
      the ground and be left for natural breakdown. That leaves only the non-
      biodegradable to be disposed off . The need to reduce our garbage
      generation should be a prime goal, instead, we are increasing the use of
      non-biodegradable products. Just pick any readymade packet of any
      ‘good quality’ eatable, say a biscuit packet, and study the packaging –
      do you see the number of protective layers used? Note that atleast one
      layer is of plastic. We have started packaging even our daily use products
      like milk and water in polybags!! In cities, fruits and vegetables can be
278   bought packed in beautiful polysterene and plastic packaging – we pay
      so much and what do we do? Contribute heavily to environmental
      pollution. State Governments across the country are trying to push for
      reduction in use of plastics and use of eco-friendly packaging. We can do
      our bit by carrying cloth or other natural fibre carry-bags when we go
      shopping and by refusing polythene bags.
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


    Hospitals generate hazardous wastes that contain disinfectants and
other harmful chemicals, and also pathogenic micro-organisms. Such
wastes also require careful treatment and disposal. The use of incinerators
is crucial to disposal of hospital waste.
    Irreparable computers and other electronic goods are known as
electronic wastes (e-wastes). E-wastes are buried in landfills or
incinerated. Over half of the e-wastes generated in the developed world
are exported to developing countries, mainly to China, India and Pakistan,
where metals like copper, iron, silicon, nickel and gold are recovered
during recycling process. Unlike developed countries, which have
specifically built facilities for recycling of e-wastes, recycling in developing
countries often involves manual participation thus exposing workers to
toxic substances present in e-wastes. Recycling is the only solution for
the treatment of e-waste, provided it is carried out in an environment-
friendly manner.

16.3.1 Case Study of Remedy for Plastic Waste
A plastic sack manufacturer in Bangalore has managed to find the ideal
solution to the ever-increasing problem of accumulating plastic waste.
Ahmed Khan, aged 57 years old, has been producing plastic sacks for
20 years. About 8 years ago, he realised that plastic waste was a real
problem. Polyblend, a fine powder of recycled modified plastic, was
developed then by his company. This mixture is mixed with the bitumen
that is used to lay roads. In collaboration with R.V.College of Engineering
and the Bangalore City Corporation, Ahmed Khan proved that blends of
Polyblend and bitumen, when used to lay roads, enhanced the bitumen’s
water repellant properties, and helped to increase road life by a factor of
three. The raw material for creating Polyblend is any plastic film waste.
So, against the price of Rs. 0.40 per kg that rag pickers had been getting
for plastic waste, Khan now offers Rs.6. Using Khan’s technique, by the
year 2002, more than 40 kms of road in Bangalore has already been
laid. At this rate, Khan will soon be running short of plastic waste in
Bangalore, to produce Polyblend. Thanks to innovations like Polyblend,
we might still avoid being smothered by plastic waste.

16.4 AGRO-CHEMICALS            AND THEIR      EFFECTS
In the wake of green revolution, use of inorganic fertilisers and pesticides
has increased manifold for enhancing crop production. Pesticides,
                                                                                   279
herbicides, fungicides, etc., are being increasingly used. These incidentally,
are also toxic to non-target organisms,that are important components of
the soil ecosystem. Do you think these can be biomagnified in the terrestrial
ecosystems? We know what the addition of increasing amounts of
chemical fertilisers can do to aquatic ecosystems vis-à-vis eutrophication.
The current problems in agriculture are, therefore, extremely grave.
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      16.4.1 Case Study of Organic Farming
      Integrated organic farming is a cyclical, zero-waste procedure, where waste
      products from one process are cycled in as nutrients for other processes.
      This allows the maximum utilisation of resource and increases the
      efficiency of production. Ramesh Chandra Dagar, a farmer in Sonipat,
      Haryana, is doing just this. He includes bee-keeping, dairy management,
      water harvesting, composting and agriculture in a chain of processes,
      which support each other and allow an extremely economical and
      sustainable venture. There is no need to use chemical fertilisers for crops,
      as cattle excreta (dung) are used as manure. Crop waste is used to create
      compost, which can be used as a natural fertiliser or can be used to
      generate natural gas for satisfying the energy needs of the farm.
      Enthusiastic about spreading information and help on the practice of
      integrated organic farming, Dagar has created the Haryana Kisan Welfare
      Club, with a current membership of 5000 farmers.

      16.5 RADIOACTIVE WASTES
      Initially, nuclear energy was hailed as a non-polluting way for generating
      electricity. Later on, it was realised that the use of nuclear energy has two
      very serious inherent problems. The first is accidental leakage, as occurred
      in the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl incidents and the second is safe
      disposal of radioactive wastes.
          Radiation, that is given off by nuclear waste is extremely damaging to
      organisms, because it causes mutations at a very high rate. At high doses,
      nuclear radiation is lethal but at lower doses, it creates various disorders,
      the most frequent of all being cancer. Therefore, nuclear waste is an
      extremely potent pollutant and has to be dealt with utmost caution.
          It has been recommended that storage of nuclear waste, after
      sufficient pre-treatment, should be done in suitably shielded
      containers buried within the rocks, about 500 m deep below the
      earth’s surface. However, this method of disposal is meeting stiff
      opposition from the public. Why do you think this method of
      disposal is not agreeable to many people?


      16.6 GREENHOUSE EFFECT             AND   GLOBAL WARMING
      The term ‘Greenhouse effect’ has been derived from a phenomenon that
      occurs in a greenhouse. Have you ever seen a greenhouse? It looks like a
280   small glass house and is used for growing plants especially during winter.
      In a greenhouse the glass panel lets the light in, but does not allow heat
      to escape. Therefore, the greenhouse warms up, very much like inside a
      car that has been parked in the sun for a few hours.
          The greenhouse effect is a naturally occurring phenomenon that is
      responsible for heating of Earth’s surface and atmosphere. You would be
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES




                  Figure 16.6 Sunlight energy at the outermost atmosphere


surprised to know that without greenhouse effect the average temperature
at surface of Earth would have been a chilly –18oC rather than the present
average of 15oC. In order to understand the
greenhouse effect, it is necessary to know the
fate of the energy of sunlight that reaches the
outermost atmosphere (Figure16.6). Clouds
and gases reflect about one-fourth of the
incoming solar radiation, and absorb some of
it but almost half of incoming solar radiation
falls on Earth’s surface heating it, while a small
proportion is reflected back. Earth’s surface
re-emits heat in the form of infrared radiation
but part of this does not escape into space as
atmospheric gases (e.g., carbon dioxide,
methane, etc.) absorb a major fraction of it. The
molecules of these gases radiate heat energy,          Figure 16.7 Relative contribution of various
                                                                     greenhouse gases to total global
and a major part of which again comes to
                                                                     warming
Earth’s surface, thus heating it up once again.
This cycle is repeated many a times. The
                                                                                                 281
above-mentioned gases – carbon dioxide and methane – are commonly
known as greenhouse gases (Figure 16.7) because they are responsible
for the greenhouse effect.
     Increase in the level of greenhouse gases has led to considerable heating
of Earth leading to global warming. During the past century, the
temperature of Earth has increased by 0.6 oC, most of it during the last
                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                       three decades. Scientists believe that this rise in temperature is leading
                       to deleterious changes in the environment and resulting in odd climatic
                       changes (e.g. El Nino effect) , thus leading to increased melting of polar
                       ice caps as well as of other places like the Himalayan snow caps. Over
                       many years, this will result in a rise in sea level that can submerge many
                       coastal areas. The total spectrum of changes that global warming can
                       bring about is a subject that is still under active research.
                           How can we control global warming? The measures include cutting
                       down use of fossil fuel, improving efficiency of energy usage, reducing
                       deforestation, planting trees and slowing down the growth of human
                       population. International initiatives are also being taken to reduce the
                       emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.

                                               16.7 OZONE DEPLETION          IN THE   STRATO-
                                               SPHERE

                                               You have earlier studied in the Chemistry
                                               textbook of Class XI about ‘bad’ ozone, formed
                                               in the lower atmosphere (troposphere) that harms
                                               plants and animals. There is ‘good’ ozone also;
                                               this ozone is found in the upper part of the
                                               atmosphere called the stratosphere, and it acts
                                               as a shield absorbing ultraviolet radiation from
                                               the sun. UV rays are highly injurious to living
                                               organisms since DNA and proteins of living
                                               organisms preferentially absorb UV rays, and its
                                               high energy breaks the chemical bonds within
                                               these molecules. The thickness of the ozone in a
 Figure 16.8 Ozone hole is the area above      column of air from the ground to the top of the
             Antarctica, shown in purple       atmosphere is measured in terms of Dobson
             colour, where the ozone layer
                                               units (DU).
             is the thinnest. Ozone
             thickness is given in Dobson            Ozone gas is continuously formed by the
             unit (see carefully the scale     action of UV rays on molecular oxygen, and also
             shown in colour violet to red).   degraded into molecular oxygen in the
             The ozone hole over Antarctica
                                               stratosphere. There should be a balance between
             develops each year between
             late August and early             production and degradation of ozone in the
             October. Courtesy: NASA           stratosphere. Of late, the balance has been
                                               disrupted due to enhancement of ozone
282                                            degradation by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
                       CFCs find wide use as refrigerants. CFCs discharged in the lower part of
                       atmosphere move upward and reach stratosphere. In stratosphere, UV
                       rays act on them releasing Cl atoms. Cl degrades ozone releasing
                       molecular oxygen, with these atoms acting merely as catalysts; Cl atoms
                       are not consumed in the reaction. Hence, whatever CFCs are added to
                       the stratosphere, they have permanent and continuing affects on Ozone
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


levels. Although ozone depletion is occurring widely in the stratosphere,
the depletion is particularly marked over the Antarctic region. This has
resulted in formation of a large area of thinned ozone layer, commonly
called as the ozone hole (Figure 16.8).
    UV radiation of wavelengths shorter than UV-B, are almost completely
absorbed by Earth’s atmosphere, given that the ozone layer is intact. But,
UV-B damages DNA and mutation may occur. It causes aging of skin,
damage to skin cells and various types of skin cancers. In human eye,
cornea absorbs UV-B radiation, and a high dose of UV-B causes
inflammation of cornea, called snow-blindness, cataract, etc. Such
exposure may permanently damage the cornea.
    Recognising the deleterious affects of ozone depletion, an international
treaty, known as the Montreal Protocol, was signed at Montreal (Canada)
in 1987 (effective in 1989) to control the emission of ozone depleting
substances. Subsequently many more efforts have been made and
protocols have laid down definite roadmaps, separately for developed and
developing countries, for reducing the emission of CFCs and other ozone
depleting chemicals.

16.8 DEGRADATION BY IMPROPER RESOURCE UTILISATION
     AND MAINTENANCE

The degradation of natural resources can occur, not just by the action of
pollutants but also by improper resource utilisation practices.
Soil erosion and desertification: The development of the fertile top-soil
takes centuries. But, it can be removed very easily due to human activities
like over-cultivation, unrestricted grazing, deforestation and poor
irrigation practices, resulting in arid patches of land. When large barren
patches extend and meet over time, a desert is created. Internationally, it
has been recognised that desertification is a major problem nowadays,
particularly due to increased urbanisation.
Waterlogging and soil salinity: Irrigation without proper drainage of
water leads to waterlogging in the soil. Besides affecting the crops,
waterlogging draws salt to the surface of the soil. The salt then is deposited
as a thin crust on the land surface or starts collecting at the roots of the
plants. This increased salt content is inimical to the growth of crops and
is extremely damaging to agriculture. Waterlogging and soil salinity are
some of the problems that have come in the wake of the Green Revolution.
                                                                                 283
16.9 DEFORESTATION
Deforestation is the conversion of forested areas to non-forested ones.
According to an estimate, almost 40 per cent forests have been lost in the
tropics, compared to only 1 per cent in the temperate region. The present
scenario of deforestation is particularly grim in India. At the beginning of
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      the twentieth century, forests covered about 30 per cent of the land of
      India. By the end of the century, it shrunk to 19.4 per cent, whereas the
      National Forest Policy (1988) of India has recommended 33 per cent forest
      cover for the plains and 67 per cent for the hills.
          How does deforestation occur? A number of human activities
      contribute to it. One of the major reasons is the conversion of forest to
      agricultural land so as to feed the growing human population. Trees are
      axed for timber, firewood, cattle ranching and for several other purposes.
      Slash and burn agriculture, commonly called as Jhum cultivation in
      the north-eastern states of India, has also contributed to deforestation.
      In slash and burn agriculture, the farmers cut down the trees of the forest
      and burn the plant remains. The ash is used as a fertiliser and the land is
      then used for farming or cattle grazing. After cultivation, the area is left
      for several years so as to allow its recovery. The farmers then move on to
      other areas and repeat this process. In earlier days, when Jhum cultivation
      was in prevalence, enough time-gap was given such that the land recovered
      from the effect of cultivation. With increasing population, and repeated
      cultivation, this recovery phase is done away with, resulting in
      deforestation.
          What are the consequences of deforestation? One of the major effects
      is enhanced carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere because
      trees that could hold a lot of carbon in their biomass are lost with
      deforestation. Deforestation also causes loss of biodiversity due to habitat
      destruction, disturbs hydrologic cycle, causes soil erosion, and may lead
      to desertification in extreme cases.
          Reforestation is the process of restoring a forest that once existed
      but was removed at some point of time in the past. Reforestation may
      occur naturally in a deforested area. However, we can speed it up by
      planting trees with due consideration to biodiversity that earlier existed
      in that area.
      16.9.1 Case Study of People’s Participation in
             Conservation of Forests
      People’s participation has a long history in India. In 1731, the king of
      Jodhpur in Rajasthan asked one of his ministers to arrange wood for
      constructing a new palace. The minister and workers went to a forest
      near a village, inhabited by Bishnois, to cut down trees. The Bishnoi
      community is known for its peaceful co-existence with nature. The effort
      to cut down trees by the kings was thwarted by the Bishnois. A Bishnoi
284   woman Amrita Devi showed exemplary courage by hugging a tree and
      daring king’s men to cut her first before cutting the tree. The tree mattered
      much more to her than her own life. Sadly, the king’s men did not heed to
      her pleas, and cut down the tree along with Amrita Devi. Her three
      daughters and hundreds of other Bishnois followed her, and thus lost
      their lives saving trees. Nowhere in history do we find a commitment of
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES


this magnitude when human beings sacrificed their lives for the cause of
the environment. The Government of India has recently instituted the
Amrita Devi Bishnoi Wildlife Protection Award for individuals or
communities from rural areas that have shown extraordinary courage
and dedication in protecting wildlife.
    You may have heard of the Chipko Movement of Garhwal Himalayas.
In 1974, local women showed enormous bravery in protecting trees from
the axe of contractors by hugging them. People all over the world have
acclaimed the Chipko movement.
    Realising the significance of participation by local communities,
the Government of India in 1980s has introduced the concept of
Joint Forest Management (JFM) so as to work closely with the local
communities for protecting and managing forests. In return for their
services to the forest, the communities get benefit of various forest products
(e.g., fruits, gum, rubber, medicine, etc.), and thus the forest can be
conserved in a sustainable manner.

                               SUMMARY
  Major issues relating to environmental pollution and depletion of
  valuable natural resources vary in dimension from local, regional to
  global levels. Air pollution primarily results from burning of fossil fuel,
  e.g., coal and petroleum, in industries and in automobiles. They are
  harmful to humans, animals and plants, and therefore must be removed
  to keep our air clean. Domestic sewage, the most common source of
  pollution of water bodies, reduces dissolved oxygen but increases
  biochemical oxygen demand of receiving water. Domestic sewage is rich
  in nutrients, especially, nitrogen and phosphorus, which cause
  eutrophication and nuisance algal blooms. Industrial waste waters are
  often rich in toxic chemicals, especially heavy metals and organic
  compounds. Industrial waste waters harm living organisms. Municipal
  solid wastes also create problems and must be disposed off in landfills.
  Disposal of hazardous wastes like defunct ships, radioactive wastes
  and e-wastes requires additional efforts. Soil pollution primarily results
  from agricultural chemicals (e.g., pesticides) and leachates from solid
  wastes deposited over it.
       Two major environmental issues of global nature are increasing
  greenhouse effect, which is warming Earth, and depletion of ozone in
  the stratosphere. Enhanced greenhouse effect is mainly due to
  increased emission of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFCs.,        285
  and also due to deforestation. It may drastically change rainfall pattern,
  global temperature, besides deleteriously affecting living organisms.
  Ozone in the stratosphere, which protects us from harmful effects of
  ultraviolet radiation, is depleting fast due to emission of CFCs thus
  increasing the risks of skin cancer, mutation and other disorders.
                                                                            BIOLOGY




                                EXERCISES
       1.   What are the various constituents of domestic sewage? Discuss the
            effects of sewage discharge on a river.
       2.   List all the wastes that you generate, at home, school or during your
            trips to other places. Could you very easily reduce the generation of
            these wastes? Which would be difficult or rather impossible to reduce?
       3.   Discuss the causes and effects of global warming. What measures need
            to be taken to control global warming?
       4.   Match the items given in column A and B:
                  Column A                                Column B
            (a) Catalytic converter           (i) Particulate matter
            (b) Electrostatic precipitator (ii) Carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides
            (c) Earmuffs                     (iii) High noise level
            (d) Landfills                    (iv) Solid wastes
       5.   Write critical notes on the following:
            (a) Eutrophication
            (b) Biological magnification
            (c) Groundwater depletion and ways for its replenishment
       6.   Why does ozone hole form over Antarctica? How will enhanced ultraviolet
            radiation affect us?
       7.   Discuss the role of women and communities in protection and
            conservation of forests.
       8.   What measures, as an individual, would you take to reduce
            environmental pollution?
       9.   Discuss briefly the following:
            (a) Radioactive wastes
            (b) Defunct ships and e-wastes
            (c) Municipal solid wastes
      10. What initiatives were taken for reducing vehicular air pollution in Delhi?
          Has air quality improved in Delhi?
      11. Discuss briefly the following :
            (a) Greenhouse gases
            (b) Catalytic converter
            (c) Ultraviolet B

286
Chapter 1                   Biology in essence is the story of life on earth. While individual
Reproduction in Organisms   organisms die without fail, species continue to live through
                            millions of years unless threatened by natural or anthropogenic
Chapter 2                   extinction. Reproduction becomes a vital process without
Sexual Reproduction in      which species cannot survive for long. Each individual leaves
flowering Plants            its progeny by asexual or sexual means. Sexual mode of
                            reproduction enables creation of new variants, so that survival
Chapter 3                   advantage is enhanced. This unit examines the general
Human Reproduction          principles underlying reproductive processes in living organisms
                            and then explains the details of this process in flowering plants
Chapter 4
                            and humans as easy to relate representative examples. A related
Reproductive Health
                            perspective on human reproductive health and how
                            reproductive ill health can be avoided is also presented to
                            complete our understanding of biology of reproduction.




                                                                                          2017-18
                       Born in November 1904 in Jaipur (Rajasthan) Panchanan Maheshwari
                       rose to become one of the most distinguished botanists not only of India
                       but of the entire world. He moved to Allahabad for higher education
                       where he obtained his D.Sc. During his college days, he was inspired
                       by Dr W. Dudgeon, an American missionary teacher, to develop interest
                       in Botany and especially morphology. His teacher once expressed that
                       if his student progresses ahead of him, it will give him a great satisfaction.
                       These words encouraged Panchanan to enquire what he could do for
                       his teacher in return.
                            He worked on embryological aspects and popularised the use of
                       embryological characters in taxonomy. He established the Department
                       of Botany, University of Delhi as an important centre of research in
                       embryology and tissue culture. He also emphasised the need for initiation
                       of work on artificial culture of immature embryos. These days, tissue
                       culture has become a landmark in science. His work on test tube
PANCHANAN MAHESHWARI
                       fertilisation and intra-ovarian pollination won worldwide acclaim.
    (1904-1966)
                            He was honoured with fellowship of Royal Society of London (FRS),
                       Indian National Science Academy and several other institutions of
                       excellence. He encouraged general education and made a significant
                       contribution to school education by his leadership in bringing out the
                       very first textbooks of Biology for Higher Secondary Schools published
                       by NCERT in 1964.




                                                                                             2017-18
CHAPTER 1
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


1.1   Asexual
      Reproduction
1.2   Sexual         Each and every organism can live only for a certain period
      Reproduction   of time. The period from birth to the natural death of an
                     organism represents its life span. Life spans of a few
                     organisms are given in Figure 1.1. Several other organisms
                     are drawn for which you should find out their life spans
                     and write in the spaces provided. Examine the life spans
                     of organisms represented in the Figure 1.1. Isn’t it both
                     interesting and intriguing to note that it may be as short
                     as a few days or as long as a few thousand years? Between
                     these two extremes are the life spans of most other living
                     organisms. You may note that life spans of organisms are
                     not necessarily correlated with their sizes; the sizes of
                     crows and parrots are not very different yet their life spans
                     show a wide difference. Similarly, a mango tree has a much
                     shorter life span as compared to a peepal tree. Whatever
                     be the life span, death of every individual organism is a
                     certainty, i.e., no individual is immortal, except single-celled
                     organisms. Why do we say there is no natural death in
                     single-celled organisms? Given this reality, have you ever
                     wondered how vast number of plant and animal species
                     have existed on earth for several thousands of years? There
                     must be some processes in living organisms that ensure
                     this continuity. Yes, we are talking about reproduction,
                     something that we take for granted.




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                          BIOLOGY




4




    Figure 1.1 Approximate life spans of some organisms




                                                          2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


    Reproduction is defined as a biological process in which an
organism gives rise to young ones (offspring) similar to itself. The offspring
grow, mature and in turn produce new offspring. Thus, there is a cycle
of birth, growth and death. Reproduction enables the continuity of the
species, generation after generation. You will study later in Chapter 5
(Principles of Inheritance and Variation) how genetic variation is created
and inherited during reproduction.
    There is a large diversity in the biological world and each organism
has evolved its own mechanism to multiply and produce offspring.
The organism’s habitat, its internal physiology and several other factors
are collectively responsible for how it reproduces. Based on whether
there is participation of one organism or two in the process of
reproduction, it is of two types. When offspring is produced by a single
parent with or without the involvement of gamete formation, the
reproduction is asexual. When two parents (opposite sex) participate in
the reproductive process and also involve fusion of male and female
gametes, it is called sexual reproduction.

1.1 ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION
In this method, a single individual (parent) is capable of producing
offspring. As a result, the offspring that are produced are not only
identical to one another but are also exact copies of their parent.
Are these offspring likely to be genetically identical or different?
The term clone is used to describe such morphologically and
genetically similar individuals.




                                                                                 (b)
                                        (a)

 Figure 1.2 Cell division in unicellular organism: (a) Budding in
            yeast; (b) Binary fission in Amoeba
                                                                                       5
    Let us see how widespread asexual reproduction is, among different
groups of organisms. Asexual reproduction is common among
single-celled organisms, and in plants and animals with relatively simple
organisations. In Protists and Monerans, the organism or the parent
cell divides into two to give rise to new individuals (Figure1.2). Thus,




                                                                                           2017-18
                                                                                      BIOLOGY




                   (a)
                                                                        (b)




                   (c)                                            (d)

Figure1.3 Asexual reproductive structures: (a) Zoospores of Chlamydomonas; (b) Conidia of
          Penicillium; (c) Buds in Hydra ; (d) Gemmules in sponge

                     in these organisms cell division is itself a mode of reproduction.
                     Many single-celled organisms reproduce by binary fission, where a
                     cell divides into two halves and each rapidly grows into an adult (e.g.,
                     Amoeba, Paramecium). In yeast, the division is unequal and small
                     buds are produced that remain attached initially to the parent cell
 6                   which, eventually gets separated and mature into new yeast
                     organisms (cells). (Please see Page 287 also)
                         Members of the Kingdom Fungi and simple plants such as algae
                     reproduce through special asexual reproductive structures (Figure 1.3).
                     The most common of these structures are zoospores that usually are
                     microscopic motile structures. Other common asexual reproductive
                     structures are conidia (Penicillium), buds (Hydra) and gemmules (sponge).




                                                                                       2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS




                                                   Nodes

                                                                                                  Buds




              (a)

                                                                                         Adventitious
                                                                             (b)            Root

                                         Adventitious
                                            Buds




        (c)                             (d)                                        (e)


Figure 1.4    Vegetative propagules in angiosperms: (a) Eyes of potato; (b) Rhizome of ginger;
              (c) Bulbil of Agave; (d) Leaf buds of Bryophyllum; (e) Offset of water hyacinth



    You have learnt about vegetative reproduction in plants in Class XI.
What do you think – Is vegetative reproduction also a type of asexual
reproduction? Why do you say so? Is the term clone applicable to the
offspring formed by vegetative reproduction?
    While in animals and other simple organisms the term asexual is used
                                                                                                  7
unambiguously, in plants, the term vegetative reproduction is frequently
used. In plants, the units of vegetative propagation such as runner,
rhizome, sucker, tuber, offset, bulb are all capable of giving rise to new
offspring (Figure1.4). These structures are called vegetative propagules.
Obviously, since the formation of these structures does not involve two
parents, the process involved is asexual. (Please see Page 287 also)




                                                                                                      2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


         You must have heard about the scourge of the water bodies or about
    the ‘terror of Bengal’. This is nothing but the aquatic plant ‘water hyacinth’
    which is one of the most invasive weeds found growing wherever there is
    standing water. It drains oxygen from the water, which leads to death of
    fishes. You will learn more about it in Chapters 13 and 14. You may find
    it interesting to know that this plant was introduced in India because of
    its beautiful flowers and shape of leaves. Since it can propagate vegetatively
    at a phenomenal rate and spread all over the water body in a short period
    of time, it is very difficult to get rid off them.
         Are you aware how plants like potato, sugarcane, banana, ginger,
    dahlia are cultivated? Have you seen small plants emerging from the
    buds (called eyes) of the potato tuber, from the rhizomes of banana and
    ginger? When you carefully try to determine the site of origin of the new
    plantlets in the plants listed above, you will notice that they invariably
    arise from the nodes present in the modified stems of these plants. When
    the nodes come in contact with damp soil or water, they produce roots
    and new plants. Similarly, adventitious buds arise from the notches
    present at margins of leaves of Bryophyllum. This ability is fully exploited
    by gardeners and farmers for commercial propagation of such plants.
         It is interesting to note that asexual reproduction is the common method
    of reproduction in organisms that have a relatively simple organisation,
    like algae and fungi and that they shift to sexual method of reproduction
    just before the onset of adverse conditions. Find out how sexual
    reproduction enables these organisms to survive during unfavourable
    conditions? Why is sexual reproduction favoured under such conditions?
    Asexual (vegetative) as well as sexual modes of reproduction are exhibited
    by the higher plants. On the other hand, only sexual mode of reproduction
    is present in most of the animals.

    1.2 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
    Sexual reproduction involves formation of the male and female gametes,
    either by the same individual or by different individuals of the opposite
    sex. These gametes fuse to form the zygote which develops to form the
    new organism. It is an elaborate, complex and slow process as compared
    to asexual reproduction. Because of the fusion of male and female gametes,
    sexual reproduction results in offspring that are not identical to the parents
    or amongst themselves.
        A study of diverse organisms–plants, animals or fungi –show that
8   though they differ so greatly in external morphology, internal structure
    and physiology, when it comes to sexual mode of reproduction,
    surprisingly, they share a similar pattern. Let us first discuss what features
    are common to these diverse organisms.
        All organisms have to reach a certain stage of growth and maturity in
    their life, before they can reproduce sexually. That period of growth is




                                                                          2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


called the juvenile phase. It is known as vegetative phase in plants.
This phase is of variable durations in different organisms.
     The end of juvenile/vegetative phase which marks the beginning of
the reproductive phase can be seen easily in the higher plants when they
come to flower. How long does it take for marigold/rice/wheat/coconut/
mango plants to come to flower? In some plants, where flowering occurs
more than once, what would you call the inter-flowering period – juvenile
or mature?
     Observe a few trees in your area. Do they flower during the same
month year after year? Why do you think the availability of fruits like
mango, apple, jackfruit, etc., is seasonal? Are there some plants that flower
throughout the year and some others that show seasonal flowering?
Plants –the annual and biennial types, show clear cut vegetative,
reproductive and senescent phases, but in the perennial species it is very
difficult to clearly define these phases. A few plants exhibit unusual
flowering phenomenon; some of them such as bamboo species flower only
once in their life time, generally after 50-100 years, produce large number
of fruits and die. Another plant, Strobilanthus kunthiana (neelakuranji),
flowers once in 12 years. As many of you would know, this plant flowered
during September-October 2006. Its mass flowering transformed large
tracks of hilly areas in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu into blue
stretches and attracted a large number of tourists. In animals, the juvenile
phase is followed by morphological and physiological changes prior to
active reproductive behaviour. The reproductive phase is also of variable
duration in different organisms.
     Can you list the changes seen in human beings that are indicative
of reproductive maturity?
     Among animals, for example birds, do they lay eggs all through the
year? Or is it a seasonal phenomenon? What about other animals like
frogs and lizards? You will notice that, birds living in nature lay eggs only
seasonally. However, birds in captivity (as in poultry farms) can be made
to lay eggs throughout the year. In this case, laying eggs is not related to
reproduction but is a commercial exploitation for human welfare. The
females of placental mammals exhibit cyclical changes in the activities of
ovaries and accessory ducts as well as hormones during the reproductive
phase. In non-primate mammals like cows, sheep, rats, deers, dogs, tiger,
etc., such cyclical changes during reproduction are called oestrus cycle
where as in primates (monkeys, apes, and humans) it is called menstrual
cycle. Many mammals, especially those living in natural, wild conditions        9
exhibit such cycles only during favourable seasons in their reproductive
phase and are therefore called seasonal breeders. Many other mammals
are reproductively active throughout their reproductive phase and hence
are called continuous breeders.
     That we all grow old (if we live long enough), is something that we
recognise. But what is meant by growing old? The end of reproductive




                                                                                    2017-18
                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                      phase can be considered as one of the parameters of senescence or old
                      age. There are concomitant changes in the body (like slowing of
                      metabolism, etc.) during this last phase of life span. Old age ultimately
                      leads to death.
                          In both plants and animals, hormones are responsible for the
                      transitions between the three phases. Interaction between hormones and
                      certain environmental factors regulate the reproductive processes and
                      the associated behavioural expressions of organisms.
                      Events in sexual reproduction : After attainment of maturity, all sexually
                      reproducing organisms exhibit events and processes that have remarkable
                      fundamental similarity, even though the structures associated with sexual
                      reproduction are indeed very different. The events of sexual reproduction
                      though elaborate and complex, follow a regular sequence. Sexual
                      reproduction is characterised by the fusion (or fertilisation) of the male and
                      female gametes, the formation of zygote and embryogenesis. For convenience
                      these sequential events may be grouped into three distinct stages namely,
                      the pre-fertilisation, fertilisation and the post-fertilisation events.


                      1.2.1 Pre-fertilisation Events
                      These include all the events of sexual reproduction prior to the fusion of
                      gametes. The two main pre-fertilisation events are gametogenesis and
                      gamete transfer.

                      1.2.1.1 Gametogenesis
                      As you are already aware, gametogenesis refers to the process of formation
                      of the two types of gametes – male and female. Gametes are haploid
                      cells. In some algae the two gametes are so similar in appearance
                      that it is not possible to categorise them into male and female gametes.




10
                    (a)                      (b)                       (c)



Figure 1.5 Types of gametes: (a) Isogametes of Cladophora (an alga); (b) Heterogametes of
           Fucus (an alga); (c) Heterogametes of Homo sapiens (Human beings)




                                                                                            2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


They are hence called homogametes (isogametes) (Figure 1.5a).
However, in a majority of sexually reproducing organisms the gametes
produced are of two morphologically distinct types (heterogametes). In
such organisms the male gamete is called the antherozoid or sperm
and the female gamete is called the egg or ovum (Figure1.5 b, c).
Sexuality in organisms: Sexual reproduction in organisms generally
involves the fusion of gametes from two different individuals. But this
is not always true. From your recollection of examples studied in
Class XI, can you identify cases where self-fertilisation is observed? Of
course, citing such examples in plants is easy.
     Plants may have both male and female reproductive structures in the
same plant (bisexual) (Figure 1.6 c, e) or on different plants (unisexual)
(Figure 1.6 d). In several fungi and plants, terms such as homothallic
and monoecious are used to denote the bisexual condition and
heterothallic and dioecious are the terms used to describe unisexual
condition. In flowering plants, the unisexual male flower is staminate,
i.e., bearing stamens, while the female is pistillate or bearing pistils. In
some flowering plants, both male and female flowers may be present on
the same individual (monoecious) or on separate individuals (dioecious).
Some examples of monoecious plants are cucurbits and coconuts and of
dioecious plants are papaya and date palm. Name the type of gametes
that are formed in staminate and pistillate flowers.
     But what about animals? Are individuals of all species either male or
female (unisexual)? Or are there species which possess both the
reproductive organs (bisexual)? You probably can make a list
of several unisexual animal species. Earthworms, (Figure 1.6 a) sponge,
tapeworm and leech, typical examples of bisexual animals that possess
both male and female reproductive organs, are hermaphrodites.
Cockroach (Figure 1.6b) is an example of a unisexual species.
Cell division during gamete formation : Gametes in all heterogametic
species are of two types namely, male and female. Gametes are haploid
though the parent plant body from which they arise may be either haploid
or diploid. A haploid parent produces gametes by mitotic division. Does
this mean that meiosis never occurs in organisms that are haploid?
Carefully examine the flow charts of life cycles of algae that you have
studied in Class XI (Chapter 3) to get a suitable answer.
    Several organisms belonging to monera, fungi, algae and bryophytes
have haploid plant body, but in organisms belonging to pteridophytes,
                                                                                  11
gymnosperms, angiosperms and most of the animals including human
beings, the parental body is diploid. It is obvious that meiosis, the reduction
division, has to occur if a diploid body has to produce haploid gametes.
    In diploid organisms, specialised cells called meiocytes (gamete mother
cell) undergo meiosis. At the end of meiosis, only one set of chromosomes




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                                        BIOLOGY




Clitellum

                                                Testis sac
                                                with testis

                                                                               Male

                                                Ovary
                                                                                         Testis




                           (a)




                                                                            Female



                                                                                        Ovary


                     (c)


                                             Antheridiophore                  (b)
                   Archegoniophore




 12
            Female thallus                  Male thallus
                                  (d)                                                     (e)


 Figure 1.6 Diversity of sexuality in organisms (a) Bisexual animal (Earthworm); (b) Unisexual
            animal (Cockroach); (c) Monoecious plant (Chara); (d) Dioecious plant (Marchantia);
            (e) Bisexual flower (sweet potato)




                                                                                        2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


Table 1.1: Chromosome Numbers in Meiocytes (diploid, 2n) and Gametes
           (haploid, n) of Some Organisms. Fill in the Blank Spaces.


  Name of organism          Chromosome number           Chromosome number
                            in meiocyte (2n)            in gamete (n)
  Human beings                    46                            23

  House fly                       12                             —

  Rat                             —                             21

  Dog                             78                             —

  Cat                             —                             19

  Fruit fly                        8                             —

  Ophioglossum (a fern)           —                            630

  Apple                           34                             —

  Rice                            —                             12

  Maize                           20                             —

  Potato                          —                             24

  Butterfly                      380                             —

  Onion                           —                              8


gets incorporated into each gamete. Carefully study Table 1.1 and fill in
the diploid and haploid chromosome numbers of organisms. Is there any
relationship in the number of chromosomes of meiocytes and gametes?

1.2.1.2 Gamete Transfer
After their formation, male and female gametes must be physically
brought together to facilitate fusion (fertilisation). Have you ever
wondered how the gametes meet? In a majority of organisms, male
gamete is motile and the female gamete is stationary. Exceptions are a
few fungi and algae in which both types of gametes are motile
(Figure1.7a). There is a need for a medium through which the male
gametes move. In several simple plants like algae, bryophytes and
pteridophytes, water is the medium through which this gamete transfer
                                                                            13
takes place. A large number of the male gametes, however, fail to reach
the female gametes. To compensate this loss of male gametes during
transport, the number of male gametes produced is several thousand
times the number of female gametes produced.
    In seed plants, pollen grains are the carriers of male gametes and
ovule have the egg. Pollen grains produced in anthers therefore, have to




                                                                             2017-18
                                                                                             BIOLOGY


                                          be transferred to the stigma before it can lead to
                                          fertilisation (Figure 1.7b). In bisexual, self-fertilising
                                          plants, e.g., peas, transfer of pollen grains to the stigma
                                          is relatively easy as anthers and stigma are located close
                                          to each other; pollen grains soon after they are shed,
                                          come in contact with the stigma. But in cross
                                          pollinating plants (including dioecious plants), a
                                          specialised event called pollination facilitates transfer
                  (a)                     of pollen grains to the stigma. Pollen grains germinate
                                          on the stigma and the pollen tubes carrying the male
                                          gametes reach the ovule and discharge male gametes
                                          near the egg. In dioecious animals, since male and
                                          female gametes are formed in different individuals, the
                                          organism must evolve a special mechanism for gamete
                                          transfer. Successful transfer and coming together of
                                          gametes is essential for the most critical event in sexual
                                          reproduction, the fertilisation.

                                          1.2.2 Fertilisation
                                            The most vital event of sexual reproduction is perhaps
                                            the fusion of gametes. This process called syngamy
                                            results in the formation of a diploid zygote. The term
                                            fertilisation is also often used for this process. The
                                            terms syngamy and fertilisation are frequently used
                                            though , interchangeably.
                                                What would happen if syngamy does not occur?
                                                However, it has to be mentioned here that in some
                  (b)                       organisms like rotifers, honeybees and even some lizards
                                            and birds (turkey), the female gamete undergoes
Figure 1.7 (a) Homogametic contact in
           alga; (b) Germinating pollen development to form new organisms without fertilisation.
           grains on the stigma of a flower This phenomenon is called parthenogenesis.
                                          Where does syngamy occur? In most aquatic
                        organisms, such as a majority of algae and fishes as well as amphibians,
                        syngamy occurs in the external medium (water), i.e., outside the body of
                        the organism. This type of gametic fusion is called external fertilisation.
                        Organisms exhibiting external fertilisation show great synchrony between
                        the sexes and release a large number of gametes into the surrounding
                        medium (water) in order to enhance the chances of syngamy. This happens
14                      in the bony fishes and frogs where a large number of offspring are
                        produced. A major disadvantage is that the offspring are extremely
                        vulnerable to predators threatening their survival up to adulthood.
                            In many terrestrial organisms, belonging to fungi, higher animals such
                        as reptiles, birds, mammals and in a majority of plants (bryophytes,
                        pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms), syngamy occurs inside




                                                                                             2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS


the body of the organism, hence the process is called internal fertilisation.
In all these organisms, egg is formed inside the female body where they
fuse with the male gamete. In organisms exhibiting internal fertilisation,
the male gamete is motile and has to reach the egg in order to fuse with it.
In these even though the number of sperms produced is very large, there
is a significant reduction in the number of eggs produced. In seed plants,
however, the non-motile male gametes are carried to female gamete by
pollen tubes.

1.2.3 Post-fertilisation Events
Events in sexual reproduction after the formation of zygote are called
post-fertilisation events.

1.2.3.1 The Zygote
Formation of the diploid zygote is universal in all sexually reproducing
organisms. In organisms with external fertilisation, zygote is formed in
the external medium (usually water), whereas in those exhibiting internal
fertilisation, zygote is formed inside the body of the organism.
     Further development of the zygote depends on the type of life cycle
the organism has and the environment it is exposed to. In organisms
belonging to fungi and algae, zygote develops a thick wall that is resistant
to dessication and damage. It undergoes a period of rest before
germination. In organisms with haplontic life cycle (As you have read
in Class XI), zygote divides by meiosis to form haploid spores that grow
into haploid individuals. Consult your Class XI book and find out what
kind of development takes place in the zygote in organisms with diplontic
and haplo-diplontic life cycles.
    Zygote is the vital link that ensures continuity of species
between organisms of one generation and the next. Every sexually
reproducing organism, including human beings begin life as a single
cell–the zygote.

1.2.3.2 Embryogenesis
Embryogenesis refers to the process of development of embryo from the
zygote. During embryogenesis, zygote undergoes cell division (mitosis)
and cell differentiation. While cell divisions increase the number of cells
in the developing embryo; cell differentiation helps groups of cells to
undergo certain modifications to form specialised tissues and organs to
                                                                                15
form an organism. You have studied about the process of cell division
and differentiation in the previous class.
    Animals are categorised into oviparous and viviparous based on
whether the development of the zygote takes place outside the body of the
female parent or inside, i.e., whether they lay fertilised/unfertilised eggs
or give birth to young ones. In oviparous animals like reptiles and birds,




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                           BIOLOGY


     the fertilised eggs covered by hard calcareous shell are laid in a safe
     place in the environment; after a period of incubation young ones hatch
     out. On the other hand, in viviparous animals (majority of mammals
     including human beings), the zygote develops into a young one inside
     the body of the female organism. After attaining a certain stage of growth,
     the young ones are delivered out of the body of the female organism.
     Because of proper embryonic care and protection, the chances of survival
     of young ones is greater in viviparous organisms.
         In flowering plants, the zygote is formed inside the ovule. After
     fertilisation the sepals, petals and stamens of the flower wither and fall
     off. Can you name a plant in which the sepals remain attached? The
     pistil however, remains attached to the plant. The zygote develops into
     the embryo and the ovules develop into the seed. The ovary develops into
     the fruit which develops a thick wall called pericarp that is protective in
     function (Figure 1.8). After dispersal, seeds germinate under favourable
     conditions to produce new plants.




          Figure 1.8 A few kinds of fruit showing seeds (S) and
                     protective pericarp (P)




                                   SUMMARY
      Reproduction enables a species to live generation after generation.
      Reproduction in organisms can be broadly classified into asexual and
      sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction does not involve the fusion
      of gametes. It is common in organisms that have a relatively simple
      organisation such as the fungi, algae and some invertebrate animals.
      The offspring formed by asexual reproduction are identical and can be
16    referred to as clones. Zoospores, conidia, etc., are the most common
      asexual structures formed in several algae and fungi. Budding and
      gemmule formation are the common asexual methods seen in animals.
           Prokaryotes and unicellular organisms reproduce asexually by
      cell division or binary fission of the parent cell. In several aquatic and
      terrestrial species of angiosperms, structures such as runners,




                                                                           2017-18
REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS




  rhizomes, suckers, tubers, offsets, etc., are capable of giving rise to
  new offspring. This method of asexual reproduction is generally
  referred to as vegetative propagation.
       Sexual reproduction involves the formation and fusion of gametes.
  It is a complex and slower process as compared to asexual reproduction.
  Most of the higher animals reproduce almost entirely by sexual method.
  Events of sexual reproduction may be categorised into pre-fertilisation,
  fertilisation and post-fertilisation events. Pre-fertilisation events include
  gametogenesis and gamete transfer while post-fertilisation events
  include the formation of zygote and embryogenesis.
       Organisms may be bisexual or unisexual. Sexuality in plants is
  varied, particularly in angiosperms, due to the production of diverse
  types of flowers. Plants are defined as monoecious and dioecious.
  Flowers may be bisexual or unisexual flowers.
       Gametes are haploid in nature and usually a direct product of meiotic
  division except in haploid organisms where gametes are formed by mitosis.
       Transfer of male gametes is an essential event in sexual reproduction.
  It is relatively easy in bisexual organisms. In unisexual animals it occurs
  by copulation or simultaneous release. In angiosperms, a special process
  called pollination ensures transfer of pollen grains which carry the pollen
  grains to the stigma.
       Syngamy (fertilisation) occurs between the male and female gametes.
  Syngamy may occur either externally, outside the body of organisms or
  internally, inside the body. Syngamy leads to formation of a specialised
  cell called zygote.
        The process of development of embryo from the zygote is called
  embryogenesis. In animals, the zygote starts developing soon after its
  formation. Animals may be either oviparous or viviparous. Embryonal
  protection and care are better in viviparous organisms.
        In flowering plants, after fertilisation, ovary develops into fruit and
  ovules mature into seeds. Inside the mature seed is the progenitor of
  the next generation, the embryo.




                       EXERCISES
 1.   Why is reproduction essential for organisms?
 2.   Which is a better mode of reproduction: sexual or asexual? Why?
 3.   Why is the offspring formed by asexual reproduction referred to as clone?
 4.   Offspring formed due to sexual reproduction have better chances of          17
      survival. Why? Is this statement always true?
 5.   How does the progeny formed from asexual reproduction differ from
      those formed by sexual reproduction?
 6.   Distinguish between asexual and sexual reproduction. Why is vegetative
      reproduction also considered as a type of asexual reproduction?




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY


      7.   What is vegetative propagation? Give two suitable examples.
      8.   Define
           (a) Juvenile phase,
           (b) Reproductive phase,
           (c) Senescent phase.
      9.   Higher organisms have resorted to sexual reproduction in spite of its
           complexity. Why?
     10. Explain why meiosis and gametogenesis are always interlinked?
     11. Identify each part in a flowering plant and write whether it is haploid
         (n) or diploid (2n).
           (a)    Ovary      ———————————
           (b)    Anther     ———————————
           (c)    Egg        ———————————
           (d)    Pollen     ———————————
           (e)    Male gamete ———————————
           (f )   Zygote     ———————————
     12. Define external fertilisation. Mention its disadvantages.
     13. Differentiate between a zoospore and a zygote.
     14. Differentiate between gametogenesis from embryogenesis.
     15. Describe the post-fertilisation changes in a flower.
     16. What is a bisexual flower? Collect five bisexual flowers from your
         neighbourhood and with the help of your teacher find out their common
         and scientific names.
     17. Examine a few flowers of any cucurbit plant and try to identify the
         staminate and pistillate flowers. Do you know any other plant that
         bears unisexual flowers?
     18. Why are offspring of oviparous animals at a greater risk as compared
         to offspring of viviparous animals?




18




                                                                         2017-18
Chapter 5                        The work of Mendel and others who followed him gave us an
Principles of Inheritance        idea of inheritance patterns. However the nature of those ‘factors’
and Variation                    which determine the phenotype was not very clear. As these
                                 ‘factors’ represent the genetic basis of inheritance, understanding
Chapter 6                        the structure of genetic material and the structural basis of
Molecular Basis of Inheritance   genotype and phenotype conversion became the focus of
                                 attention in biology for the next century. The entire body of
Chapter 7                        molecular biology was a consequent development with major
Evolution                        contributions from Watson, Crick, Nirenberg, Khorana, Kornbergs
                                 (father and son), Benzer, Monod, Brenner, etc. A parallel problem
                                 being tackled was the mechanism of evolution. Awareness in the
                                 areas of molecular genetics, structural biology and bio informatics
                                 have enriched our understanding of the molecular basis of
                                 evolution. In this unit the structure and function of DNA and the
                                 story and theory of evolution have been examined and explained.




                                                                                            2017-18
                James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago on 6 April 1928. In 1947, he
                received B.Sc. degree in Zoology. During these years his interest in
                bird-watching had matured into a serious desire to learn genetics. This
                became possible when he received a Fellowship for graduate study in
                Zoology at Indiana University, Bloomington, where he received his Ph.D.
                degree in 1950 on a study of the effect of hard X-rays on bacteriophage
                multiplication.
                    He met Crick and discovered their common interest in solving the
                DNA structure. Their first serious effort, was unsatisfactory. Their second effort
                based upon more experimental evidence and better appreciation of
                the nucleic acid literature, resulted, early in March 1953, in the proposal
                of the complementary double-helical configuration.
                Francis Harry Compton Crick was born on 8 June 1916, at Northampton,
JAMES WATSON    England. He studied physics at University College, London and obtained
FRANCIS CRICK   a B.Sc. in 1937. He completed Ph.D. in 1954 on a thesis entitled “X-ray
                Diffraction: Polypeptides and Proteins”.
                    A critical influence in Crick’s career was his friendship with J. D.
                Watson, then a young man of 23, leading in 1953 to the proposal of
                the double-helical structure for DNA and the replication scheme. Crick
                was made an F.R.S. in 1959.
                    The honours to Watson with Crick include: the John Collins Warren
                Prize of the Massachusetts General Hospital, in 1959; the Lasker Award,
                in 1960; the Research Corporation Prize, in 1962 and above all, the
                Nobel Prize in 1962.




                                                                                          2017-18
CHAPTER 5

PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE
AND VARIATION

5.1   Mendel’s Laws of
      Inheritance
5.2   Inheritance of One Gene    Have you ever wondered why an elephant always gives
                                 birth only to a baby elephant and not some other animal?
5.3   Inheritance of Two Genes   Or why a mango seed forms only a mango plant and not
5.4   Sex Determination          any other plant?
                                     Given that they do, are the offspring identical to their
5.5   Mutation
                                 parents? Or do they show differences in some of their
5.6   Genetic Disorders          characteristics? Have you ever wondered why siblings
                                 sometimes look so similar to each other? Or sometimes
                                 even so different?
                                     These and several related questions are dealt with,
                                 scientifically, in a branch of biology known as Genetics.
                                 This subject deals with the inheritance, as well as the
                                 variation of characters from parents to offspring.
                                 Inheritance is the process by which characters are passed
                                 on from parent to progeny; it is the basis of heredity.
                                 Variation is the degree by which progeny differ from their
                                 parents.
                                     Humans knew from as early as 8000-1000 B.C. that
                                 one of the causes of variation was hidden in sexual
                                 reproduction. They exploited the variations that were
                                 naturally present in the wild populations of plants and
                                 animals to selectively breed and select for organisms that
                                 possessed desirable characters. For example, through
                                 artificial selection and domestication from ancestral




                                                                                         2017-18
                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                                                     wild cows, we have well-known Indian
                                                     breeds, e.g., Sahiwal cows in Punjab. We
                                                     must, however, recognise that though our
                                                     ancestors knew about the inheritance of
                                                     characters and variation, they had very
                                                     little idea about the scientific basis of these
                                                     phenomena.

                                                     5.1 MENDEL’S LAWS           OF   INHERITANCE
                                                   It was during the mid-nineteenth century that
                                                   headway was made in the understanding of
                                                   inheritance. Gregor Mendel, conducted
                                                   hybridisation experiments on garden peas for
                                                   seven years (1856-1863) and proposed the
                                                   laws of inheritance in living organisms. During
                                                   Mendel’s investigations into inheritance
                                                   patterns it was for the first time that statistical
                                                   analysis and mathematical logic were applied
                                                   to problems in biology. His experiments had a
                                                   large sampling size, which gave greater
                                                   credibility to the data that he collected. Also,
                                                   the confirmation of his inferences from
                                                   experiments on successive generations of his
                                                   test plants, proved that his results pointed to
                                                   general rules of inheritance rather than being
                                                   unsubstantiated ideas. Mendel investigated
                                                   characters in the garden pea plant that were
                                                   manifested as two opposing traits, e.g., tall or
                                                   dwarf plants, yellow or green seeds. This
                                                   allowed him to set up a basic framework of
                                                   rules governing inheritance, which was
                                                   expanded on by later scientists to account for
                                                   all the diverse natural observations and the
                                                   complexity inherent in them.
                                                       Mendel conducted such artificial
Figure 5.1 Seven pairs of contrasting traits in    pollination/cross    pollination experiments
           pea plant studied by Mendel             using several true-breeding pea lines. A true-
                                                   breeding line is one that, having undergone
 70                   continuous self-pollination, shows the stable trait inheritance and
                      expression for several generations. Mendel selected 14 true-breeding pea
                      plant varieties, as pairs which were similar except for one character with
                      contrasting traits. Some of the contrasting traits selected were smooth or
                      wrinkled seeds, yellow or green seeds, inflated (full) or constricted green
                      or yellow pods and tall or dwarf plants (Figure 5.1, Table 5.1).




                                                                                              2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


Table 5.1: Contrasting Traits Studied by
           Mendel in Pea

S.No.    Characters        Contrasting Traits
1.       Stem height       Tall/dwarf
2.       Flower colour     Violet/white
3.       Flower position   Axial/terminal
4.       Pod shape         Inflated/constricted
5.       Pod colour        Green/yellow
6.       Seed shape        Round/wrinkled
7.       Seed colour       Yellow/green

5.2 INHERITANCE          OF   ONE GENE
Let us take the example of one such
hybridisation experiment carried out by
Mendel where he crossed tall and dwarf pea
plants to study the inheritance of one gene
(Figure 5.2). He collected the seeds produced
as a result of this cross and grew them to
generate plants of the first hybrid generation.
This generation is also called the Filial1
progeny or the F1. Mendel observed that all
the F1 progeny plants were tall, like one of
its parents; none were dwarf (Figure 5.3). He
made similar observations for the other pairs
of traits – he found that the F1 always
resembled either one of the parents, and that
the trait of the other parent was not seen in
them.
    Mendel then self-pollinated the tall F1
plants and to his surprise found that in the
Filial2 generation some of the offspring were
‘dwarf ’; the character that was not seen in
the F1 generation was now expressed. The                 Figure 5.2 Steps in making a cross in pea
proportion of plants that were dwarf were
1/4th of the F2 plants while 3/4th of the F2 plants were tall. The tall and
dwarf traits were identical to their parental type and did not show any
blending, that is all the offspring were either tall or dwarf, none were of in-                  71
between height (Figure 5.3).
    Similar results were obtained with the other traits that he studied:
only one of the parental traits was expressed in the F1 generation while at
the F2 stage both the traits were expressed in the proportion 3:1. The
contrasting traits did not show any blending at either F1 or F2 stage.




                                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                                        BIOLOGY


                                                            Based on these observations,
                                                       Mendel proposed that something
                                                       was being stably passed down,
                                                       unchanged, from parent to offspring
                                                       through the gametes, over
                                                       successive generations. He called
                                                       these things as ‘factors’. Now we call
                                                       them as genes. Genes, therefore, are
                                                       the units of inheritance. They
                                                       contain the information that is
                                                       required to express a particular trait
                                                       in an organism. Genes which code
                                                       for a pair of contrasting traits are
                                                       known as alleles, i.e., they are
                                                       slightly different forms of the same
                                                       gene.
                                                            If we use alphabetical symbols
                                                       for each gene, then the capital letter
                                                       is used for the trait expressed at the
                                                       F1 stage and the small alphabet for
                                                       the other trait. For example, in case
                                                       of the character of height, T is used
                                                       for the Tall trait and t for the ‘dwarf’,
                                                       and T and t are alleles of each other.
                                                       Hence, in plants the pair of alleles
                                                       for height would be TT, Tt or tt.
     Figure 5.3 Diagrammatic representation            Mendel also proposed that in a true
                 of monohybrid cross                   breeding, tall or dwarf pea variety
                                                       the allelic pair of genes for height are
               identical or homozygous, TT and tt, respectively. TT and tt are called
               the genotype of the plant while the descriptive terms tall and dwarf are
               the phenotype. What then would be the phenotype of a plant that had a
               genotype Tt?
                   As Mendel found the phenotype of the F1 heterozygote Tt to be exactly
               like the TT parent in appearance, he proposed that in a pair of dissimilar
               factors, one dominates the other (as in the F1 ) and hence is called the
               dominant factor while the other factor is recessive . In this case T (for
               tallness) is dominant over t (for dwarfness), that is recessive. He observed
72             identical behaviour for all the other characters/trait-pairs that he studied.
                   It is convenient (and logical) to use the capital and lower case of an
               alphabetical symbol to remember this concept of dominance and
               recessiveness. (Do not use T for tall and d for dwarf because you will
               find it difficult to remember whether T and d are alleles of the same
               gene/character or not). Alleles can be similar as in the case of homozygotes
               TT and tt or can be dissimilar as in the case of the heterozygote Tt. Since




                                                                                        2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


the Tt plant is heterozygous for genes controlling
one character (height), it is a monohybrid and the
cross between TT and tt is a monohybrid cross.
    From the observation that the recessive parental
trait is expressed without any blending in the F2
generation, we can infer that, when the tall and
dwarf plant produce gametes, by the process of
meiosis, the alleles of the parental pair separate or
segregate from each other and only one allele is
transmitted to a gamete. This segregation of alleles
is a random process and so there is a 50 per cent
chance of a gamete containing either allele, as has
been verified by the results of the crossings. In this
way the gametes of the tall TT plants have the allele
T and the gametes of the dwarf tt plants have the
allele t. During fertilisation the two alleles, T from
one parent say, through the pollen, and t from the
other parent, then through the egg, are united to
produce zygotes that have one T allele and one t
allele. In other words the hybrids have Tt. Since
these hybrids contain alleles which express
contrasting traits, the plants are heterozygous. The
production of gametes by the parents, the formation
of the zygotes, the F 1 and F 2 plants can be
understood from a diagram called Punnett Square
as shown in Figure 5.4. It was developed by a British
geneticist, Reginald C. Punnett. It is a graphical
representation to calculate the probability of all
possible genotypes of offspring in a genetic cross.
The possible gametes are written on two sides,
usually the top row and left columns. All possible
combinations are represented in boxes below in the
squares, which generates a square output form.
    The Punnett Square shows the parental tall TT Figure 5.4 A Punnett square used to
(male) and dwarf tt (female) plants, the gametes                  understand a typical monohybrid
                                                                  cross conducted by Mendel
produced by them and, the F1 Tt progeny. The F1                   between true-breeding tall plants
plants of genotype Tt are self-pollinated. The                    and true-breeding dwarf plants
symbols & and % are used to denote the female
(eggs) and male (pollen) of the F1 generation, respectively. The F1 plant of                  73
the genotype Tt when self-pollinated, produces gametes of the genotype
T and t in equal proportion. When fertilisation takes place, the pollen
grains of genotype T have a 50 per cent chance to pollinate eggs of the
genotype T, as well as of genotype t. Also pollen grains of genotype t have
a 50 per cent chance of pollinating eggs of genotype T, as well as of




                                                                                                2017-18
                                                                           BIOLOGY


     genotype t. As a result of random fertilisation, the resultant zygotes can
     be of the genotypes TT, Tt or tt.
         From the Punnett square it is easily seen that 1/4th of the random
     fertilisations lead to TT, 1/2 lead to Tt and 1/4th to tt. Though the F1
     have a genotype of Tt, but the phenotypic character seen is ‘tall’. At F2,
     3/4th of the plants are tall, where some of them are TT while others are
     Tt. Externally it is not possible to distinguish between the plants with
     the genotypes TT and Tt. Hence, within the genopytic pair Tt only one
     character ‘T ’ tall is expressed. Hence the character T or ‘tall’ is said to
     dominate over the other allele t or ‘dwarf’ character. It is thus due to this
     dominance of one character over the other that all the F1 are tall (though
     the genotype is Tt) and in the F2 3/4th of the plants are tall (though
     genotypically 1/2 are Tt and only 1/4th are TT). This leads to a phenotypic
     ratio of 3/4th tall : (1/4 TT + 1/2 Tt) and 1/4th tt, i.e., a 3:1 ratio, but a
     genotypic ratio of 1:2:1.
         The 1/4 : 1/2 : 1/4 ratio of TT: Tt: tt is mathematically condensable
     to the form of the binomial expression (ax +by)2, that has the gametes
     bearing genes T or t in equal frequency of ½. The expression is expanded
     as given below :

     (1/2T + 1/2 t)2 = (1/2T + 1/2t) X (1/2T + 1/2t) = 1/4 TT + 1/2Tt + 1/4 tt

         Mendel self-pollinated the F2 plants and found that dwarf F2 plants
     continued to generate dwarf plants in F3 and F4 generations. He concluded
     that the genotype of the dwarfs was homozygous – tt. What do you think
     he would have got had he self-pollinated a tall F2 plant?
         From the preceeding paragraphs it is clear that though the genotypic
     ratios can be calculated using mathematical probability, by simply looking
     at the phenotype of a dominant trait, it is not possible to know the
     genotypic composition. That is, for example, whether a tall plant from F1
     or F2 has TT or Tt composition, cannot be predicted. Therefore, to determine
     the genotype of a tall plant at F2, Mendel crossed the tall plant from F2
     with a dwarf plant. This he called a test cross. In a typical test cross an
     organism (pea plants here) showing a dominant phenotype (and whose
     genotype is to be determined) is crossed with the recessive parent instead
     of self-crossing. The progenies of such a cross can easily be analysed to
     predict the genotype of the test organism. Figure 5.5 shows the results of
     typical test cross where violet colour flower (W) is dominant over white
74   colour flower (w).
     Using Punnett square, try to find out the nature of offspring of a test cross.
     What ratio did you get?
     Using the genotypes of this cross, can you give a general definition for
     a test cross?




                                                                           2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION




                      Figure 5.5 Diagrammatic representation of a test cross


   Based on his observations on monohybrid crosses Mendel proposed
two general rules to consolidate his understanding of inheritance in
monohybrid crosses. Today these rules are called the Principles or
Laws of Inheritance: the First Law or Law of Dominance and the
Second Law or Law of Segregation.

5.2.1 Law of Dominance
      (i) Characters are controlled by discrete units called factors.
     (ii) Factors occur in pairs.
     (iii) In a dissimilar pair of factors one member of the pair dominates
           (dominant) the other (recessive).
    The law of dominance is used to explain the expression of only one of
the parental characters in a monohybrid cross in the F1 and the expression
of both in the F2. It also explains the proportion of 3:1 obtained at the F2.

5.2.2 Law of Segregation
This law is based on the fact that the alleles do not show any blending
and that both the characters are recovered as such in the F2 generation
                                                                                  75
though one of these is not seen at the F1 stage. Though the parents contain
two alleles during gamete formation, the factors or alleles of a pair segregate
from each other such that a gamete receives only one of the two factors.
Of course, a homozygous parent produces all gametes that are similar
while a heterozygous one produces two kinds of gametes each having
one allele with equal proportion.




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                                               BIOLOGY


                                                 5.2.2.1 Incomplete Dominance
                                                 When experiments on peas were repeated using other
                                                 traits in other plants, it was found that sometimes
                                                 the F1 had a phenotype that did not resemble either
                                                 of the two parents and was in between the two. The
                                                 inheritance of flower colour in the dog flower
                                                 (snapdragon or Antirrhinum sp.) is a good example
                                                 to understand incomplete dominance. In a cross
                                                 between true-breeding red-flowered (RR) and true-
                                                 breeding white-flowered plants (rr), the F1 (Rr) was
                                                 pink (Figure 5.6). When the F1 was self-pollinated
                                                 the F2 resulted in the following ratio 1 (RR) Red : 2
                                                 (Rr) Pink : 1 (rr) White. Here the genotype ratios were
                                                 exactly as we would expect in any mendelian
                                                 monohybrid cross, but the phenotype ratios had
                                                 changed from the 3:1 dominant : recessive ratio.
                                                 What happened was that R was not completely
                                                 dominant over r and this made it possible to
                                                 distinguish Rr as pink from RR (red) and rr (white) .
                                             Explanation of the concept of dominance:
                                             What exactly is dominance? Why are some alleles
                                             dominant and some recessive? To tackle these
                                             questions, we must understand what a gene does.
                                             Every gene, as you know by now, contains the
                                             information to express a particular trait. In a
                                             diploid organism, there are two copies of each
                                             gene, i.e., as a pair of alleles. Now, these two alleles
                                             need not always be identical, as in a heterozygote.
                                             One of them may be different due to some changes
                                             that it has undergone (about which you will read
                                             further on, and in the next chapter) which modifies
                                             the information that particular allele contains.
                                                  Let’s take an example of a gene that contains
                                             the information for producing an enzyme. Now
Figure 5.6 Results of monohybrid cross in
           the plant Snapdragon, where       there are two copies of this gene, the two allelic
           one allele is incompletely        forms. Let us assume (as is more common) that
           dominant over the other allele    the normal allele produces the normal enzyme
                                             that is needed for the transformation of a
 76                   substrate S. Theoretically, the modified allele could be responsible for
                      production of –
                              (i) the normal/less efficient enzyme, or
                              (ii) a non-functional enzyme, or
                             (iii) no enzyme at all




                                                                                                2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


      In the first case, the modified allele is equivalent to the unmodified allele,
i.e., it will produce the same phenotype/trait, i.e., result in the transformation
of substrate S. Such equivalent allele pairs are very common. But, if the
allele produces a non-functional enzyme or no enzyme, the phenotype may
be effected. The phenotype/trait will only be dependent on the functioning
of the unmodified allele. The unmodified (functioning) allele, which represents
the original phenotype is the dominant allele and the modified allele is
generally the recessive allele. Hence, in the example above the recessive trait
is seen due to non-functional enzyme or because no enzyme is produced.

5.2.2.2 Co-dominance
Till now we were discussing crosses where the F1 resembled either of the
two parents (dominance) or was in-between (incomplete dominance). But,
in the case of co-dominance the F1 generation resembles both parents. A
good example is different types of red blood cells that determine ABO
blood grouping in human beings. ABO blood groups are controlled by
the gene I. The plasma membrane of the red blood cells has sugar polymers
that protrude from its surface and the kind of sugar is controlled by the
gene. The gene (I) has three alleles IA, IB and i. The alleles IA and IB produce
a slightly different form of the sugar while allele i does not produce any
sugar. Because humans are diploid organisms, each person possesses
any two of the three I gene alleles. IA and IB are completely dominant over
i, in other words when IA and i are present only IA expresses (because i
does not produce any sugar), and when IB and i are present IB expresses.
But when IA and IB are present together they both express their own types
of sugars: this is because of co-dominance. Hence red blood cells have
both A and B types of sugars. Since there are three different alleles, there
are six different combinations of these three alleles that are possible, and
therefore, a total of six different genotypes of the human ABO blood types
(Table 5.2). How many phenotypes are possible?
     Table 5.2: Table Showing the Genetic Basis of Blood Groups
                in Human Population

       Allele from       Allele from        Genotype of          Blood
       Parent 1          Parent 2           offspring            types of
                                                                 offspring
           A                 A
       I                 I                  I AI A               A
           A                 B                  A       B
       I                 I                  I I                  AB
       I   A
                         i                  I Ai                 A                     77
       IB                I   A
                                            I AI B               AB
           B                 B                  B       B
       I                 I                  I       I            B
       IB                i                  I   B
                                                    i            B
       i                 i                  ii                   O




                                                                                        2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY


         Do you realise that the example of ABO blood grouping also provides
     a good example of multiple alleles? Here you can see that there are
     more than two, i.e., three alleles, governing the same character. Since in
     an individual only two alleles can be present, multiple alleles can be found
     only when population studies are made.
         Occasionally, a single gene product may produce more than one effect.
     For example, starch synthesis in pea seeds is controlled by one gene. It
     has two alleles (B and b). Starch is synthesised effectively by BB
     homozygotes and therefore, large starch grains are produced. In contrast,
     bb homozygotes have lesser efficiency in starch synthesis and produce
     smaller starch grains. After maturation of the seeds, BB seeds are round
     and the bb seeds are wrinkled. Heterozygotes produce round seeds, and
     so B seems to be the dominant allele. But, the starch grains produced are
     of intermediate size in Bb seeds. So if starch grain size is considered as
     the phenotype, then from this angle, the alleles show incomplete
     dominance.
         Therefore, dominance is not an autonomous feature of a gene or the
     product that it has information for. It depends as much on the gene
     product and the production of a particular phenotype from this product
     as it does on the particular phenotype that we choose to examine, in case
     more than one phenotype is influenced by the same gene.

     5.3 INHERITANCE       OF   TWO GENES
     Mendel also worked with and crossed pea plants that differed in two
     characters, as is seen in the cross between a pea plant that has seeds with
     yellow colour and round shape and one that had seeds of green colour
     and wrinkled shape (Figure5.7). Mendel found that the seeds resulting
     from the crossing of the parents, had yellow coloured and round shaped
     seeds. Here can you tell which of the characters in the pairs yellow/
     green colour and round/wrinkled shape was dominant?
         Thus, yellow colour was dominant over green and round shape
     dominant over wrinkled. These results were identical to those that he got
     when he made separate monohybrid crosses between yellow and green
     seeded plants and between round and wrinkled seeded plants.
         Let us use the genotypic symbols Y for dominant yellow seed colour
     and y for recessive green seed colour, R for round shaped seeds and r for
     wrinkled seed shape. The genotype of the parents can then be written as
     RRYY and rryy. The cross between the two plants can be written down
78   as in Figure 5.7 showing the genotypes of the parent plants. The gametes
     RY and ry unite on fertilisation to produce the F1 hybrid RrYy. When
     Mendel self hybridised the F1 plants he found that 3/4th of F2 plants had
     yellow seeds and 1/4th had green. The yellow and green colour segregated
     in a 3:1 ratio. Round and wrinkled seed shape also segregated in a 3:1
     ratio; just like in a monohybrid cross.




                                                                         2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION




                                                                                        79



Figure 5.7 Results of a dihybrid cross where the two parents differed in two pairs of
           contrasting traits: seed colour and seed shape




                                                                                         2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY


     5.3.1 Law of Independent Assortment
     In the dihybrid cross (Figure 5.7), the phenotypes round, yellow;
     wrinkled, yellow; round, green and wrinkled, green appeared in the
     ratio 9:3:3:1. Such a ratio was observed for several pairs of characters
     that Mendel studied.
         The ratio of 9:3:3:1 can be derived as a combination series of 3 yellow:
     1 green, with 3 round : 1 wrinkled. This derivation can be written
     as follows:
         (3 Round : 1 Wrinkled) (3 Yellow : 1 Green) = 9 Round, Yellow : 3
     Wrinkled, Yellow: 3 Round, Green : 1 Wrinkled, Green
         Based upon such observations on dihybrid crosses (crosses between
     plants differing in two traits) Mendel proposed a second set of generalisations
     that we call Mendel’s Law of Independent Assortment. The law states that
     ‘when two pairs of traits are combined in a hybrid, segregation of one pair
     of characters is independent of the other pair of characters’.
         The Punnett square can be effectively used to understand the
     independent segregation of the two pairs of genes during meiosis and
     the production of eggs and pollen in the F1 RrYy plant. Consider the
     segregation of one pair of genes R and r. Fifty per cent of the gametes
     have the gene R and the other 50 per cent have r. Now besides each
     gamete having either R or r, it should also have the allele Y or y. The
     important thing to remember here is that segregation of 50 per cent R
     and 50 per cent r is independent from the segregation of 50 per cent
     Y and 50 per cent y. Therefore, 50 per cent of the r bearing gametes
     has Y and the other 50 per cent has y. Similarly, 50 per cent of the R
     bearing gametes has Y and the other 50 per cent has y. Thus there are
     four genotypes of gametes (four types of pollen and four types of eggs).
     The four types are RY, Ry, rY and ry each with a frequency of 25 per
     cent or 1/4th of the total gametes produced. When you write down the
     four types of eggs and pollen on the two sides of a Punnett square it is
     very easy to derive the composition of the zygotes that give rise to the
     F2 plants (Figure 5.7). Although there are 16 squares how many
     different types of genotypes and phenotypes are formed? Note them
     down in the format given.
         Can you, using the Punnett square data work out the genotypic ratio
     at the F2 stage and fill in the format given? Is the genotypic ratio
     also 9:3:3:1?

80     S.No.     Genotypes found in F2           Their expected Phenotypes



     5.3.2 Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
     Mendel published his work on inheritance of characters in 1865
     but for several reasons, it remained unrecognised till 1900. Firstly,




                                                                            2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


communication was not easy (as it is now) in those days and his work
could not be widely publicised. Secondly, his concept of genes (or
factors, in Mendel’s words) as stable and discrete units that controlled
the expression of traits and, of the pair of alleles which did not ‘blend’
with each other, was not accepted by his contemporaries as an
explanation for the apparently continuous variation seen in nature.
Thirdly, Mendel’s approach of using mathematics to explain biological
phenomena was totally new and unacceptable to many of the
biologists of his time. Finally, though Mendel’s work suggested that
factors (genes) were discrete units, he could not provide any physical
proof for the existence of factors or say what they were made of.
    In 1900, three Scientists (de Vries, Correns and von Tschermak)
independently rediscovered Mendel’s results on the inheritance of
characters. Also, by this time due to advancements in microscopy that
were taking place, scientists were able to carefully observe cell division.
This led to the discovery of structures in the nucleus that appeared to
double and divide just before each cell division. These were called
chromosomes (colored bodies, as they were visualised by staining). By
1902, the chromosome movement during meiosis had been worked out.
Walter Sutton and Theodore Boveri noted that the behaviour of
chromosomes was parallel to the behaviour of genes and used
chromosome movement (Figure 5.8) to explain Mendel’s laws (Table 5.3).
Recall that you have studied the behaviour of chromosomes during mitosis
(equational division) and during meiosis (reduction division). The
important things to remember are that chromosomes as well as genes
occur in pairs. The two alleles of a gene pair are located on homologous
sites on homologous chromosomes.




                                                                              81


Figure 5.8 Meiosis and germ cell formation in a cell with four chromosomes.
           Can you see how chromosomes segregate when germ cells
           are formed?




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                           BIOLOGY


     Table 5.3: A Comparison between the Behaviour of Chromosomes
                and Genes

                      A                                      B
     Occur in pairs                      Occur in pairs
     Segregate at the time of gamete Segregate at gamete formation and only
     formation such that only one of each one of each pair is transmitted to a
     pair is transmitted to a gamete      gamete
     Independent pairs segregate One pair segregates independently of
     independently of each other another pair
           Can you tell which of these columns A or B represent the chromosome
       and which represents the gene? How did you decide?

          During Anaphase of meiosis I, the two chromosome pairs can align at
     the metaphase plate independently of each other (Figure 5.9). To
     understand this, compare the chromosomes of four different colour in
     the left and right columns. In the left column (Possibility I) orange and
     green is segregating together. But in the right hand column (Possibility
     II) the orange chromosome is segregating with the red chromosomes.

                Possibility I                             Possibility II
        One long orange and short green         One long orange and short red
        chromosome and long yellow and        chromosome and long yellow and
         short red chromosome at the           short green chromosome at the
                  same pole                             same pole




82




               Figure 5.9 Independent assortment of chromosomes




                                                                           2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


    Sutton and Boveri argued that the pairing and separation of
a pair of chromosomes would lead to the segregation of a pair of
factors they carried. Sutton united the knowledge of chromosomal
segregation with Mendelian principles and called it the
chromosomal theory of inheritance.
    Following this synthesis of ideas, experimental verification of
the chromosomal theory of inheritance by Thomas Hunt Morgan
and his colleagues, led to discovering the basis for the variation      (a)          (b)
that sexual reproduction produced. Morgan worked with the tiny Figure 5.10 Drosophila
fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 5.10), which were         melanogaster (a) Male
                                                                            (b) Female
found very suitable for such studies. They could be grown on
simple synthetic medium in the laboratory. They complete their life
cycle in about two weeks, and a single mating could produce a large
number of progeny flies. Also, there was a clear differentiation of
the sexes – the male and female flies are easily distinguishable. Also,
it has many types of hereditary variations that can be seen with
low power microscopes.

5.3.3 Linkage and Recombination
Morgan carried out several dihybrid crosses in Drosophila to study genes
that were sex-linked. The crosses were similar to the dihybrid crosses carried
out by Mendel in peas. For example Morgan hybridised yellow-bodied,
white-eyed females to brown-bodied, red-eyed males and intercrossed their
F1 progeny. He observed that the two genes did not segregate independently
of each other and the F2 ratio deviated very significantly from the 9:3:3:1
ratio (expected when the two genes are independent).
    Morgan and his group knew that the genes were located on the X
chromosome (Section 5.4) and saw quickly that when the two genes in a
dihybrid cross were situated on the same chromosome, the proportion
of parental gene combinations were much higher than the non-parental
type. Morgan attributed this due to the physical association or linkage
of the two genes and coined the term linkage to describe this physical
association of genes on a chromosome and the term recombination to
describe the generation of non-parental gene combinations (Figure 5.11).
Morgan and his group also found that even when genes were grouped
on the same chromosome, some genes were very tightly linked (showed
very low recombination) (Figure 5.11, Cross A) while others were loosely
linked (showed higher recombination) (Figure 5.11, Cross B). For
                                                                                        83
example he found that the genes white and yellow were very tightly linked
and showed only 1.3 per cent recombination while white and miniature
wing showed 37.2 per cent recombination. His student Alfred
Sturtevant used the frequency of recombination between gene pairs
on the same chromosome as a measure of the distance between genes
and ‘mapped’ their position on the chromosome. Today genetic maps




                                                                                         2017-18
                                                                                      BIOLOGY


                    are extensively used as a starting point in the sequencing of whole
                    genomes as was done in the case of the Human Genome Sequencing
                    Project, described later.




84

 Figure 5.11 Linkage: Results of two dihybrid crosses conducted by Morgan. Cross A shows
             crossing between gene y and w; Cross B shows crossing between genes w and m.
             Here dominant wild type alleles are represented with (+) sign in superscript
             Note: The strength of linkage between y and w is higher than w and m.




                                                                                      2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


5.6 SEX DETERMINATION
(Please see Page 287 and 288 also)
The mechanism of sex determination has
always been a puzzle before the geneticists.
The initial clue about the genetic/
chromosomal mechanism of sex
determination can be traced back to some
of the experiments carried out in insects. In
fact, the cytological observations made in a
number of insects led to the development of
the concept of genetic/chromosomal basis
of sex-determination. Henking (1891) could                                 (a)
trace a specific nuclear structure all through
spermatogenesis in a few insects, and it was
also observed by him that 50 per cent of the
sperm received this structure after
spermatogenesis, whereas the other 50 per
cent sperm did not receive it. Henking gave
a name to this structure as the X body but                                (b)
he could not explain its significance. Further
investigations by other scientists led to the
conclusion that the ‘X body’ of Henking was
in fact a chromosome and that is why it was
given the name X-chromosome. It was also
observed that in a large number of insects the
mechanism of sex determination is of the XO
type, i.e., all eggs bear an additional X-                                (c)
chromosome besides the other
chromosomes (autosomes). On the other
hand, some of the sperms bear the Figure 5.12 Determination of sex by chromosomal
X-chromosome whereas some do not.                            differences: (a,b) Both in humans and
Eggs fertilised by sperm having an                           in Drosophila, the female has a pair of
X-chromosome become females and,                             XX chromosomes (homogametic) and the
those fertilised by sperms that do not have                  male XY (heterogametic) composition;
an X-chromosome become males. Do you                         (c) In many birds, female has a pair of
think the number of chromosomes in the male                  dissimilar chromosomes ZW and male
                                                             two similar ZZ chromosomes
and female are equal? Due to the involvement
of the X-chromosome in the determination of
sex, it was designated to be the sex chromosome, and the rest of the
chromosomes were named as autosomes.Grasshopper is an example of XO                           85
type of sex determination in which the males have only one X-chromosome
besides the autosomes, whereas females have a pair of X-chromosomes.
    These observations led to the investigation of a number of species to
understand the mechanism of sex determination. In a number of other
insects and mammals including man, XY type of sex determination is
seen where both male and female have same number of chromosomes.




                                                                                                2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY


     Among the males an X-chromosome is present but its counter part is
     distinctly smaller and called the Y-chromosome. Females, however, have
     a pair of X-chromosomes. Both males and females bear same number of
     autosomes. Hence, the males have autosomes plus XY, while female have
     autosomes plus XX. In human beings and in Drosophila the males have
     one X and one Y chromosome, whereas females have a pair of X-
     chromosomes besides autosomes (Figure 5.12 a, b).
         In the above description you have studied about two types of sex
     determining mechanisms, i.e., XO type and XY type. But in both cases
     males produce two different types of gametes, (a) either with or without
     X-chromosome or (b) some gametes with X-chromosome and some with
     Y-chromosome. Such types of sex determination mechanism is
     designated to be the example of male heterogamety. In some other
     organisms, e.g., birds, a different mechanism of sex determination is
     observed (Figure 5.12 c). In this case the total number of chromosome
     is same in both males and females. But two different types of gametes in
     terms of the sex chromosomes, are produced by females, i.e., female
     heterogamety. In order to have a distinction with the mechanism of
     sex determination described earlier, the two different sex chromosomes
     of a female bird has been designated to be the Z and W chromosomes.
     In these organisms the females have one Z and one W chromosome,
     whereas males have a pair of Z-chromosomes besides the autosomes.

     5.6.1 Sex Determination in Humans
     It has already been mentioned that the sex determining mechanism in
     case of humans is XY type. Out of 23 pairs of chromosomes present, 22
     pairs are exactly same in both males and females; these are the autosomes.
     A pair of X-chromosomes are present in the female, whereas the presence
     of an X and Y chromosome are determinant of the male characteristic.
     During spermatogenesis among males, two types of gametes are produced.
     50 per cent of the total sperm produced carry the X-chromosome and
     the rest 50 per cent has Y-chromosome besides the autosomes. Females,
     however, produce only one type of ovum with an X-chromosome. There
     is an equal probability of fertilisation of the ovum with the sperm carrying
     either X or Y chromosome. In case the ovum fertilises with a sperm
     carrying X-chromosome the zygote develops into a female (XX) and the
     fertilisation of ovum with Y-chromosome carrying sperm results into a
     male offspring. Thus, it is evident that it is the genetic makeup of the
     sperm that determines the sex of the child. It is also evident that in each
86   pregnancy there is always 50 per cent probability of either a male or a
     female child. It is unfortunate that in our society women are blamed for
     giving birth to female children and have been ostracised and ill-treated
     because of this false notion.
         How is the sex-determination mechanism different in the birds?
     Is the sperm or the egg responsible for the sex of the chicks?




                                                                         2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


5.7 MUTATION
Mutation is a phenomenon which results in alteration of DNA sequences
and consequently results in changes in the genotype and the phenotype
of an organism. In addition to recombination, mutation is another
phenomenon that leads to variation in DNA.
    As you will learn in Chapter 6, one DNA helix runs continuously from
one end to the other in each chromatid, in a highly supercoiled form.
Therefore loss (deletions) or gain (insertion/duplication) of a segment of
DNA, result in alteration in chromosomes. Since genes are known to be
located on chromosomes, alteration in chromosomes results in
abnormalities or aberrations. Chromosomal aberrations are commonly
observed in cancer cells.
    In addition to the above, mutation also arise due to change in a single
base pair of DNA. This is known as point mutation. A classical example of
such a mutation is sickle cell anemia. Deletions and insertions of base
pairs of DNA, causes frame-shift mutations (see Chapter 6).
    The mechanism of mutation is beyond the scope of this discussion, at
this level. However, there are many chemical and physical factors that
induce mutations. These are referred to as mutagens. UV radiations can
cause mutations in organisms – it is a mutagen.

5.8 GENETIC DISORDERS
5.8.1 Pedigree Analysis
The idea that disorders are inherited has been prevailing in the human
society since long. This was based on the heritability of certain
characteristic features in families. After the rediscovery of Mendel’s work
the practice of analysing inheritance pattern of traits in human beings
began. Since it is evident that control crosses that can be performed in
pea plant or some other organisms, are not possible in case of human
beings, study of the family history about inheritance of a particular trait
provides an alternative. Such an analysis of traits in a several of
generations of a family is called the pedigree analysis. In the pedigree
analysis the inheritance of a particular trait is represented in the family
tree over generations.
    In human genetics, pedigree study provides a strong tool, which is
utilised to trace the inheritance of a specific trait, abnormality or disease.
Some of the important standard symbols used in the pedigree analysis             87
have been shown in Figure 5.13.
    As you have studied in this chapter, each and every feature in any
organism is controlled by one or the other gene located on the DNA present
in the chromosome. DNA is the carrier of genetic information. It is hence
transmitted from one generation to the other without any change or




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                         BIOLOGY


                                           alteration. However, changes or alteration do take
                                           place occasionally. Such an alteration or change in
                                           the genetic material is referred to as mutation. A
                                           number of disorders in human beings have been
                                           found to be associated with the inheritance of changed
                                           or altered genes or chromosomes.

                                           5.8.2 Mendelian Disorders
                                            Broadly, genetic disorders may be grouped into two
                                            categories – Mendelian disorders and Chromosomal
                                            disorders. Mendelian disorders are mainly
                                            determined by alteration or mutation in the single
                                            gene. These disorders are transmitted to the
                                            offspring on the same lines as we have studied in
                                            the principle of inheritance. The patter n of
                                            inheritance of such Mendelian disorders can be
                                            traced in a family by the pedigree analysis. Most
                                            common and prevalent Mendelian disorders are
                                            Haemophilia, Cystic fibrosis, Sickle-cell anaemia,
                                            Colour blindness, Phenylketonuria, Thalassemia, etc.
                                            It is important to mention here that such Mendelian
                                            disorders may be dominant or recessive. By pedigree
                                            analysis one can easily understand whether the trait
Figure 5.13 Symbols used in the human
            pedigree analysis
                                            in question is dominant or recessive. Similarly, the
                                            trait may also be linked to the sex chromosome as in
                                            case of haemophilia. It is evident that this X-linked
                       recessive trait shows transmission from carrier female to male progeny. A
                       representative pedigree is shown in Figure 5.14 for dominant and recessive
                       traits. Discuss with your teacher and design pedigrees for characters
                       linked to both autosomes and sex chromosome.




88

                         (a)                                                     (b)

Figure 5.14 Representative pedigree analysis of (a) Autosomal dominant trait (for example:
            Myotonic dystrophy) (b) Autosomal recessive trait (for example: Sickle-cell anaemia)




                                                                                          2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


Haemophilia : This sex linked recessive disease, which shows its
transmission from unaffected carrier female to some of the male progeny
has been widely studied. In this disease, a single protein that is a part of
the cascade of proteins involved in the clotting of blood is affected. Due to
this, in an affected individual a simple cut will result in non-stop bleeding.
The heterozygous female (carrier) for haemophilia may transmit the disease
to sons. The possibility of a female becoming a haemophilic is extremely
rare because mother of such a female has to be at least carrier and the
father should be haemophilic (unviable in the later stage of life). The family
pedigree of Queen Victoria shows a number of haemophilic descendents
as she was a carrier of the disease. (Please see Page 289 also)
Sickle-cell anaemia : This is an autosome linked recessive trait that can
be transmitted from parents to the offspring when both the partners are
carrier for the gene (or heterozygous). The disease is controlled by a single
pair of allele, HbA and HbS. Out of the three possible genotypes only
homozygous individuals for HbS (HbSHbS) show the diseased phenotype.
Heterozygous (HbAHbS) individuals appear apparently unaffected but they
are carrier of the disease as there is 50 per cent probability of transmission
of the mutant gene to the progeny, thus exhibiting sickle-cell trait (Figure
5.15). The defect is caused by the substitution of Glutamic acid (Glu) by




                                                                                                89


 Figure 5.15 Micrograph of the red blood cells and the amino acid composition of the relevant portion
             of β-chain of haemoglobin: (a) From a normal individual; (b) From an individual with
             sickle-cell anaemia




                                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


               Valine (Val) at the sixth position of the beta globin chain of the haemoglobin
               molecule. The substitution of amino acid in the globin protein results
               due to the single base substitution at the sixth codon of the beta globin
               gene from GAG to GUG. The mutant haemoglobin molecule undergoes
               polymerisation under low oxygen tension causing the change in the shape
               of the RBC from biconcave disc to elongated sickle like structure (Figure
               5.15).
               Phenylketonuria : This inborn error of metabolism is also inherited as
               the autosomal recessive trait. The affected individual lacks an enzyme
               that converts the amino acid phenylalanine into tyrosine. As a result of
               this phenylalanine is accumulated and converted into phenylpyruvic acid
               and other derivatives. Accumulation of these in brain results in mental
               retardation. These are also excreted through urine because of its poor
               absorption by kidney. (Please see Page 289 also)

               5.8.3 Chromosomal Disorders
               The chromosomal disorders on the other hand are caused due to absence
               or excess or abnormal arrangement of one or more chromosomes.
                   Failure of segregation of chromatids during cell division cycle results
               in the gain or loss of a chromosome(s), called aneuploidy. For example,
               Down’s syndrome results in the gain of extra copy of chromosome 21.
               Similarly, Turner’s syndrome results due to loss of an X chromosome in
               human females. Failure of cytokinesis after telophase stage of cell division
               results in an increase in a whole set of chromosomes in an organism and,




     Flat back of head                   Broad flat face
      Many “loops” on
      finger tips
                                         Big and wrinkled
        Palm crease                      tongue

                                         Congenital heart
                                         disease



90


      Figure 5.16     A representative figure showing an individual inflicted with Down’s
                      syndrome and the corresponding chromosomes of the individual




                                                                                     2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION


this phenomenon is known as polyploidy. This
condition is often seen in plants.
    The total number of chromosomes in a
normal human cell is 46 (23 pairs). Out of these
22 pairs are autosomes and one pair of
chromosomes are sex chromosome.
Sometimes, though rarely, either an additional
copy of a chromosome may be included in an
individual or an individual may lack one of any
one pair of chromosomes. These situations are
known as trisomy or monosomy of a
chromosome, respectively. Such a situation
leads to very serious consequences in the
individual. Down’s syndrome, Turner’s
syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome are common
                                                                              (b)
examples of chromosomal disorders.
                                                       (a)
Down’s Syndrome : The cause of this genetic
                                                    Tall stature         Short stature and
disorder is the presence of an additional copy     with feminised         underdeveloped
of the chromosome number 21 (trisomy of 21).         character          feminine character
This disorder was first described by Langdon
Down (1866). The affected individual is short
                                                    Figure 5.17 Diagrammatic represe-
statured with small round head, furrowed            ntation of genetic disorders due to sex
tongue and partially open mouth (Figure 5.16).      chromosome composition in humans :
Palm is broad with characteristic palm crease.      (a) Klinefelter Syndrome; (b) Turner’s
                                                    Syndrome
Physical, psychomotor and mental
development is retarded.
Klinefelter’s Syndrome : This genetic disorder
is also caused due to the presence of an
additional copy of X-chromosome resulting into
a karyotype of 47, XXY. Such an individual has
overall masculine development , however, the
feminine development (development of breast,
i.e., Gynaecomastia) is also expressed (Figure
5.17 a). Such individuals are sterile.
Turner’s Syndrome : Such a disorder is
caused due to the absence of one of the X
chromosomes, i.e., 45 with X0, Such females                                           91
are sterile as ovaries are rudimentary besides
other features including lack of other secondary
sexual characters (Figure 5.17 b).




                                                                                        2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY




                                  SUMMARY
     Genetics is a branch of biology which deals with principles of inheritance
     and its practices. Progeny resembling the parents in morphological and
     physiological features has attracted the attention of many biologists.
     Mendel was the first to study this phenomenon systematically. While
     studying the pattern of inheritance in pea plants of contrasting
     characters, Mendel proposed the principles of inheritance, which are
     today referred to as ‘Mendel’s Laws of Inheritance’. He proposed that
     the ‘factors’ (later named as genes) regulating the characters are found
     in pairs known as alleles. He observed that the expression of the
     characters in the offspring follow a definite pattern in different–first
     generations (F1), second (F2) and so on. Some characters are dominant
     over others. The dominant characters are expressed when factors are
     in heterozygous condition (Law of Dominance). The recessive characters
     are only expressed in homozygous conditions. The characters never
     blend in heterozygous condition. A recessive character that was not
     expressed in heterozygous conditon may be expressed again when it
     becomes homozygous. Hence, characters segregate while formation of
     gametes (Law of Segregation).
         Not all characters show true dominance. Some characters show
     incomplete, and some show co-dominance. When Mendel studied the
     inheritance of two characters together, it was found that the factors
     independently assort and combine in all permutations and
     combinations (Law of Independent Assortment). Different combinations
     of gametes are theoretically represented in a square tabular form known
     as ‘Punnett Square’. The factors (now known as gene) on chromosomes
     regulating the characters are called the genotype and the physical
     expression of the chraracters is called phenotype.
         After knowing that the genes are located on the chromosomes, a
     good correlation was drawn between Mendel’s laws : segregation and
     assortment of chromosomes during meiosis. The Mendel’s laws were
     extended in the form of ‘Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance’. Later, it
     was found that Mendel’s law of independent assortment does not hold
     true for the genes that were located on the same chromosomes. These
     genes were called as ‘linked genes’. Closely located genes assorted
     together, and distantly located genes, due to recombination, assorted
     independently. Linkage maps, therefore, corresponded to arrangement
     of genes on a chromosome.
92       Many genes were linked to sexes also, and called as sex-linked
     genes. The two sexes (male and female) were found to have a set of
     chromosomes which were common, and another set which was
     different. The chromosomes which were different in two sexes were
     named as sex chromosomes. The remaining set was named as
     autosomes. In humans, a normal female has 22 pairs of autosomes




                                                                          2017-18
PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION




      and a pair of sex chromosomes (XX). A male has 22 pairs of autosomes
      and a pair of sex chromosome as XY. In chicken, sex chromosomes in
      male are ZZ, and in females are ZW.
          Mutation is defined as change in the genetic material. A point
      mutation is a change of a single base pair in DNA. Sickle-cell anemia is
      caused due to change of one base in the gene coding for beta-chain of
      hemoglobin. Inheritable mutations can be studied by generating a
      pedigree of a family. Some mutations involve changes in whole set of
      chromosomes (polyploidy) or change in a subset of chromosome number
      (aneuploidy). This helped in understanding the mutational basis of
      genetic disorders. Down’s syndrome is due to trisomy of chromosome 21,
      where there is an extra copy of chromosome 21 and consequently the
      total number of chromosome becomes 47. In Turner’s syndrome, one X
      chromosome is missing and the sex chromosome is as XO, and in
      Klinefelter’s syndrome, the condition is XXY. These can be easily studied
      by analysis of Karyotypes.




                         EXERCISES
 1.    Mention the advantages of selecting pea plant for experiment by Mendel.
 2.    Differentiate between the following –
       (a) Dominance and Recessive
       (b) Homozygous and Heterozygous
       (c) Monohybrid and Dihybrid.
 3.    A diploid organism is heterozygous for 4 loci, how many types of gametes
       can be produced?
 4.    Explain the Law of Dominance using a monohybrid cross.
 5.    Define and design a test-cross.
 6.    Using a Punnett Square, workout the distribution of phenotypic features
       in the first filial generation after a cross between a homozygous female
       and a heterozygous male for a single locus.                                93
 7.    When a cross in made between tall plant with yellow seeds (TtYy) and
       tall plant with green seed (Ttyy), what proportions of phenotype in the
       offspring could be expected to be
       (a) tall and green.
       (b) dwarf and green.




                                                                                   2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


      8.   Two heterozygous parents are crossed. If the two loci are linked what
           would be the distribution of phenotypic features in F1 generation for a
           dibybrid cross?
      9.   Briefly mention the contribution of T.H. Morgan in genetics.
     10. What is pedigree analysis? Suggest how such an analysis, can be useful.
     11. How is sex determined in human beings?
     12. A child has blood group O. If the father has blood group A and mother
         blood group B, work out the genotypes of the parents and the possible
         genotypes of the other offsprings.
     13. Explain the following terms with example
           (a) Co-dominance
           (b) Incomplete dominance
     14. What is point mutation? Give one example.
     15. Who had proposed the chromosomal theory of the inheritance?
     16. Mention any two autosomal genetic disorders with their symptoms.




94




                                                                          2017-18
CHAPTER 9

STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT
IN FOOD PRODUCTION

9.1   Animal Husbandry

9.2   Plant Breeding
                             With ever -increasing population of the world,
9.3   Single Cell Proteins   enhancement of food production is a major necessity.
9.4   Tissue Culture         Biological principles as applied to animal husbandry and
                             plant breeding have a major role in our efforts to increase
                             food production. Several new techniques like embryo
                             transfer technology and tissue culture techniques are going
                             to play a pivotal role in further enhancing food production.


                             9.1 ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
                             Animal husbandry is the agricultural practice of breeding
                             and raising livestock. As such it is a vital skill for farmers
                             and is as much science as it is art. Animal husbandry
                             deals with the care and breeding of livestock like buffaloes,
                             cows, pigs, horses, cattle, sheep, camels, goats, etc., that
                             are useful to humans. Extended, it includes poultry
                             farming and fisheries. Fisheries include rearing, catching,
                             selling, etc., of fish, molluscs (shell-fish) and crustaceans
                             (prawns, crabs, etc.). Since time immemorial, animals like
                             bees, silk-worm, prawns, crabs, fishes, birds, pigs, cattle,
                             sheep and camels have been used by humans for products
                             like milk, eggs, meat, wool, silk, honey, etc.
                                 It is estimated that more then 70 per cent of the world
                             livestock population is in India and China. However, it is
                                                                            BIOLOGY


      surprising to note that the contribution to the world farm produce is only
      25 per cent, i.e., the productivity per unit is very low. Hence, in addition
      to conventional practices of animal breeding and care, newer technologies
      also have to be applied to achieve improvement in quality and productivity.

      9.1.1 Management of Farms and Farm Animals
      A professional approach to what have been traditional practices of farm
      management gives the much needed boost to our food production. Let us
      discuss some of the management procedures, employed in various animal
      farm systems.

      9.1.1.1 Dairy Farm Management
      Dairying is the management of animals for milk and its products for
      human consumption. Can you list the animals that you would expect
      to find in a dairy? What are different kinds of products that can be
      made with milk from a dairy farm? In dairy farm management, we deal
      with processes and systems that increase yield and improve quality of
      milk. Milk yield is primarily dependent on the quality of breeds in the
      farm. Selection of good breeds having high yielding potential (under the
      climatic conditions of the area), combined with resistance to diseases is
      very important. For the yield potential to be realised the cattle have to be
      well looked after – they have to be housed well, should have adequate
      water and be maintained disease free. The feeding of cattle should be
      carried out in a scientific manner – with special emphasis on the quality
      and quantity of fodder. Besides, stringent cleanliness and hygiene (both
      of the cattle and the handlers) are of paramount importance while milking,
      storage and transport of the milk and its products. Nowadays, of course,
      much of these processes have become mechanised, which reduces chance
      of direct contact of the produce with the handler. Ensuring these stringent
      measures would of course, require regular inspections, with proper record
      keeping. It would also help to identify and rectify the problems as early
      as possible. Regular visits by a veterinary doctor would be mandatory.
          You would probably find it interesting if you were to prepare a
      questionnaire on diverse aspects of dairy keeping and then follow it up with
      a visit to a dairy farm in your locality and seek answers to the questions.

      9.1.1.2 Poultry Farm Management
      Poultry is the class of domesticated fowl (birds) used for food or for their
166
      eggs. They typically include chicken and ducks, and sometimes turkey and
      geese. The word poultry is often used to refer to the meat of only these birds,
      but in a more general sense it may refer to the meat of other birds too.
         As in dairy farming, selection of disease free and suitable breeds,
      proper and safe farm conditions, proper feed and water, and hygiene and
      health care are important components of poultry farm management.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


    You may have seen TV news or read newspaper –
reports about the ‘bird flu virus’ which created a scare in
the country and drastically affected egg and chicken
consumption. Find out more about it and discuss whether
the panic reaction was justified. How can we prevent the
spread of the flu in case some chicken are infected?

9.1.2 Animal Breeding
Breeding of animals is an important aspect of animal
                                                                                (a)
husbandry. Animal breeding aims at increasing the yield
of animals and improving the desirable qualities of the
produce. For what kind of characters would we breed
animals? Would the selection of characters differ with
the choice of animals?
    What do we understand by the term ‘breed’? A group
of animals related by descent and similar in most characters
like general appearance, features, size, configuration, etc.,
are said to belong to a breed. Find out the names of some
common breeds of cattle and poultry in the farms of your
area.
    When breeding is between animals of the same breed it                       (b)
is called inbreeding, while crosses between different breeds     Figure 9.1 Improved breed of
are called outbreeding.                                                     cattle and chickens
Inbreeding : Inbreeding refers to the mating of more                        (a) Jersey (b) Leghorn
closely related individuals within the same breed for 4-
6 generations. The breeding strategy is as follows – superior males and
superior females of the same breed are identified and mated in pairs.
The progeny obtained from such matings are evaluated and superior
males and females among them are identified for further mating. A
superior female, in the case of cattle, is the cow or buffalo that produces
more milk per lactation. On the other hand, a superior male is the bull,
which gives rise to superior progeny as compared to those of other
males.
Try to recollect the homozygous purelines developed by Mendel as
discussed in Chapter 5. A similar strategy is used for developing purelines
in cattle as was used in case of peas. Inbreeding increases homozygosity.
Thus inbreeding is necessary if we want to evolve a pureline in any animal.
Inbreeding exposes harmful recessive genes that are eliminated by selection.
It also helps in accumulation of superior genes and elimination of less
                                                                                             167
desirable genes. Therefore, this approach, where there is selection at each
step, increases the productivity of inbred population. However, continued
inbreeding, especially close inbreeding, usually reduces fertility and even
productivity. This is called inbreeding depression. Whenever this becomes
a problem, selected animals of the breeding population should be mated
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                   with unrelated superior animals of the same breed. This usually helps
                   restore fertility and yield.
                   Out-breeding : Out-breeding is the breeding of the unrelated animals,
                   which may be between individuals of the same breed but having no
                   common ancestors for 4-6 generations (out-crossing) or between
                   different breeds (cross-breeding) or different species (inter-specific
                   hybridisation).
                   Out-crossing: This is the practice of mating of animals within the same
                   breed, but having no common ancestors on either side of their pedigree
                   up to 4-6 generations. The offspring of such a mating is known as an
                   out-cross. It is the best breeding method for animals that are below
                   average in productivity in milk production, growth rate in beef cattle,
                   etc. A single outcross often helps to overcome inbreeding depression.
                   Cross-breeding: In this method, superior males of one breed are mated
                   with superior females of another breed. Cross-breeding allows the
                   desirable qualities of two different breeds to be combined. The progeny
                   hybrid animals may themselves be used for commercial production.
                   Alternatively, they may be subjected to some form of inbreeding and
                   selection to develop new stable breeds that may be superior to the existing
                   breeds. Many new animal breeds have been developed by this approach.
                   Hisardale is a new breed of sheep developed in Punjab by crossing
                   Bikaneri ewes and Marino rams.
                   Interspecific hybridisation: In this method, male and female animals
                   of two different related species are mated. In some cases, the progeny
                   may combine desirable features of both the parents, and may be of
                   considerable economic value, e.g., the mule (Figure 9.2). Do you know
                   what cross leads to the production of the mule?
                      Controlled breeding experiments are carried out using artificial
                                 insemination. The semen is collected from the male that
                                 is chosen as a parent and injected into the reproductive
                                 tract of the selected female by the breeder. The semen
                                 may be used immediately or can be frozen and used at a
                                 later date. It can also be transported in a frozen form to
                                 where the female is housed. In this way desirable matings
                                 are carried. Artificial insemination helps us overcome
                                 several problems of normal matings. Can you discuss
                                 and list some of them?
                                     Often, the success rate of crossing mature male and
      Figure 9.2 Mule            female animals is fairly low even though artificial
168                              insemination is carried out. To improve chances of
                  successful production of hybrids, other means are also used. Multiple
                  Ovulation Embryo Transfer Technology (MOET) is one such
                  programme for herd improvement. In this method, a cow is administered
                  hormones, with FSH-like activity, to induce follicular maturation and super
                  ovulation – instead of one egg, which they normally yield per cycle, they
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


produce 6-8 eggs. The animal is either mated with an elite bull or
artificially inseminated. The fertilised eggs at 8–32 cells stages, are
recovered non-surgically and transferred to surrogate mothers. The genetic
mother is available for another round of super ovulation. This technology
has been demonstrated for cattle, sheep, rabbits, buffaloes, mares, etc.
High milk-yielding breeds of females and high quality (lean meat with
less lipid) meat-yielding bulls have been bred successfully to increase
herd size in a short time.

9.1.3 Bee-keeping
Bee-keeping or apiculture is the maintenance of hives of honeybees for
the production of honey. It has been an age-old cottage industry. Honey
is a food of high nutritive value and also finds use in the indigenous
systems of medicine. Honeybee also produces beeswax, which finds many
uses in industry, such as in the preparation of cosmetics and polishes of
various kinds. The increased demand of honey has led to large-scale bee-
keeping practices; it has become an established income generating
industry, whether practiced on a small or on a large scale.
       Bee-keeping can be practiced in any area where there are sufficient
bee pastures of some wild shrubs, fruit orchards and cultivated crops.
There are several species of honeybees which can be reared. Of these, the
most common species is Apis indica. Beehives can be kept in one’s
courtyard, on the verandah of the house or even on the roof. Bee-keeping
is not labour-intensive.
       Bee-keeping though relatively easy does require some specialised
knowledge and there are several organisations that teach bee-keeping.
The following points are important for successful bee-keeping:
    (i) Knowledge of the nature and habits of bees,
  (ii) Selection of suitable location for keeping the beehives,
 (iii) Catching and hiving of swarms (group of bees),
 (iv) Management of beehives during different seasons, and
   (v) Handling and collection of honey and of beeswax. Bees are the pollinators
        of many of our crop species (see chapter 2) such as sunflower, Brassica,
        apple and pear. Keeping beehives in crop fields during flowering period
        increases pollination efficiency and improves the yield– beneficial both
        from the point of view of crop yield and honey yield.

9.1.4 Fisheries
Fishery is an industry devoted to the catching, processing or selling of fish,
                                                                                    169
shellfish or other aquatic animals. A large number of our population is
dependent on fish, fish products and other aquatic animals such as prawn,
crab, lobster, edible oyster, etc., for food. Some of the freshwater fishes which
are very common include Catla, Rohu and common carp. Some of the marine
fishes that are eaten include – Hilsa, Sardines, Mackerel and Pomfrets.
Find out what fishes are commonly eaten in your area.
                                                                              BIOLOGY


          Fisheries has an important place in Indian economy. It provides income
      and employment to millions of fishermen and farmers, particularly in the
      coastal states. For many, it is the only source of their livelihood. In order
      to meet the increasing demands on fisheries, different techniques have
      been employed to increase production. For example, through aquaculture
      and pisciculture we have been able to increase the production of aquatic
      plants and animals, both fresh-water and marine. Find out the difference
      between pisciculture and aquaculture. This has led to the development
      and flourishing of the fishery industry, and it has brought a lot of income
      to the farmers in particular and the country in general. We now talk about
      ‘Blue Revolution’ as being implemented along the same lines as ‘Green
      Revolution’.

      9.2 PLANT BREEDING
      Traditional farming can only yield a limited biomass, as food for humans
      and animals. Better management practices and increase in acreage can
      increase yield, but only to a limited extent. Plant breeding as a technology
      has helped increase yields to a very large extent. Who in India has not
      heard of Green Revolution which was responsible for our country to
      not merely meet the national requirements in food production but also
      helped us even to export it? Green revolution was dependent to a large
      extent on plant breeding techniques for development of high-yielding and
      disease resistant varieties in wheat, rice, maize, etc.

      9.2.1 What is Plant Breeding?
      Plant breeding is the purposeful manipulation of plant species in order to
      create desired plant types that are better suited for cultivation, give better
      yields and are disease resistant. Conventional plant breeding has been
      practiced for thousands of years, since the beginning of human civilisation;
      recorded evidence of plant breeding dates back to 9,000-11,000 years ago.
      Many present-day crops are the result of domestication in ancient times.
      Today, all our major food crops are derived from domesticated varieties.
      Classical plant breeding involves crossing or hybridisation of pure lines,
      followed by artificial selection to produce plants with desirable traits of higher
      yield, nutrition and resistance to diseases. With advancements in genetics,
      molecular biology and tissue culture, plant breeding is now increasingly
      being carried out by using molecular genetic tools.
170        If we were to list the traits or characters that the breeders have tried to
      incorporate into crop plants, the first we would list would be increased
      crop yield and improved quality. Increased tolerance to environmental
      stresses (salinity, extreme temperatures, drought), resistance to pathogens
      (viruses, fungi and bacteria) and increased tolerance to insect pests would
      be on our list too.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


   Plant breeding programmes are carried out in a systematic way
worldwide–in government institutions and commercial companies. The
main steps in breeding a new genetic variety of a crop are –
 (i) Collection of variability: Genetic variability is the root of any
     breeding programme. In many crops pre-existing genetic variability
     is available from wild relatives of the crop. Collection and preservation
     of all the different wild varieties, species and relatives of the cultivated
     species (followed by their evaluation for their characteristics) is a
     pre-requisite for effective exploitation of natural genes available in
     the populations. The entire collection (of plants/seeds) having all
     the diverse alleles for all genes in a given crop is called germplasm
     collection.
(ii) Evaluation and selection of parents: The germplasm is evaluated
     so as to identify plants with desirable combination of characters.
     The selected plants are multiplied and used in the process of
     hybridisation. Purelines are created wherever desirable and possible.
(iii) Cross hybridisation among the selected parents: The desired
      characters have very often to be combined from two different plants
      (parents), for example high protein quality of one parent may need
      to be combined with disease resistance from another parent. This is
      possible by cross hybridising the two parents to produce hybrids
      that genetically combine the desired characters in one plant. This is
      a very time-consuming and tedious process since the pollen
      grains from the desirable plant chosen as male parent have to be
      collected and placed on the stigma of the flowers selected as female
      parent (In chapter 2 details on how to make crosses have been
      described). Also, it is not necessary that the hybrids do combine the
      desirable characters; usually only one in few hundred to a thousand
      crosses shows the desirable combination.
(iv) Selection and testing of superior recombinants : This step
      consists of selecting, among the progeny of the hybrids, those plants
      that have the desired character combination. The selection process is
      crucial to the success of the breeding objective and requires careful
      scientific evaluation of the progeny. This step yields plants that are
      superior to both of the parents (very often more than one superior
      progeny plant may become available). These are self-pollinated for
      several generations till they reach a state of uniformity (homozygosity),
      so that the characters will not segregate in the progeny.                     171
(v) Testing, release and commercialisation of new cultivars: The
    newly selected lines are evaluated for their yield and other agronomic
    traits of quality, disease resistance, etc. This evaluation is done by
    growing these in the research fields and recording their performance
    under ideal fertiliser application, irrigation, and other crop
    management practices. The evaluation in research fields is followed
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                      by testing the materials in farmers’ fields, for at least three growing
                      seasons at several locations in the country, representing all the
                      agroclimatic zones where the crop is usually grown. The material is
                      evaluated in comparison to the best available local crop cultivar – a
                      check or reference cultivar.
                     India is mainly an agricultural country. Agriculture accounts
                 for approximately 33 per cent of India’s GDP and employs nearly
                 62 per cent of the population. After India’s independence, one of the main
                 challenges facing the country was that of producing enough food for the
                 increasing population. As only limited land is fit for cultivation, India has
                 to strive to increase yields per unit area from existing farm land. The
                 development of several high yielding varieties of wheat and rice in the
                 mid-1960s, as a result of various plant breeding techniques led to dramatic
                 increase in food production in our country. This phase is often referred
                 to as the Green Revolution. Figure 9.3 represents some Indian hybrid
                 crops of high yeilding varieties.




                    (a)                                                 (b)




172

                                             (c)


      Figure 9.3 Some Indian hybrid crops: (a) Maize; (b) Wheat; (c) Garden peas
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


Wheat and Rice: During the period 1960 to 2000, wheat production
increased from 11 million tonnes to 75 million tonnes while rice production
went up from 35 million tonnes to 89.5 million tonnes. This was due to the
development of semi-dwarf varieties of wheat and rice. Nobel laureate
Norman E. Borlaug, at International Centre for Wheat and Maize
Improvement in Mexico, developed semi-dwarf wheat. In 1963, several
varieties such as Sonalika and Kalyan Sona, which were high yielding and
disease resistant, were introduced all over the wheat-growing belt of India.
Semi-dwarf rice varieties were derived from IR-8, (developed at International
Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Philippines) and Taichung Native-1 (from
Taiwan). The derivatives were introduced in 1966. Later better-yielding semi-
dwarf varieties Jaya and Ratna were developed in India.
Sugar cane: Saccharum barberi was originally grown in north India, but
had poor sugar content and yield. Tropical canes grown in south India
Saccharum officinarum had thicker stems and higher sugar content but
did not grow well in north India. These two species were successfully
crossed to get sugar cane varieties combining the desirable qualities of
high yield, thick stems, high sugar and ability to grow in the sugar cane
areas of north India.
Millets: Hybrid maize, jowar and bajra have been successfully developed
in India. Hybrid breeding have led to the development of several high
yielding varieties resistant to water stress.

9.2.2 Plant Breeding for Disease Resistance
A wide range of fungal, bacterial and viral pathogens, affect the yield of
cultivated crop species, especially in tropical climates. Crop losses can
often be significant, up to 20-30 per cent, or sometimes even total. In this
situation, breeding and development of cultivars resistant to disease
enhances food production. This also helps reduce the dependence on
use of fungicides and bacteriocides. Resistance of the host plant is the
ability to prevent the pathogen from causing disease and is determined
by the genetic constitution of the host plant. Before breeding is
undertaken, it is important to know about the causative organism and
the mode of transmission. Some of the diseases caused by fungi are rusts,
e.g., brown rust of wheat, red rot of sugarcane and late blight of potato;
by bacteria – black rot of crucifers; and by viruses – tobacco mosaic,
turnip mosaic, etc.
                                                                                173
Methods of breeding for disease resistance: Breeding is carried
out by the conventional breeding techniques (described earlier) or by
mutation breeding. The conventional method of breeding for disease
resistance is that of hybridisation and selection. It’s steps are essentially
identical to those for breeding for any other agronomic characters such
as high yield. The various sequential steps are : screening germplasm
                                                                            BIOLOGY


      for resistance sources, hybridisation of selected parents, selection and
      evaluation of the hybrids and testing and release of new varieties.
          Some crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
      disease resistance to fungi, bacteria and viral diseases are released
      (Table 9.1).

                                       Table 9.1

        Crop                Variety                Resistance to diseases

        Wheat               Himgiri                Leaf and stripe rust, hill bunt

        Brassica            Pusa swarnim           White rust
                            (Karan rai)

        Cauliflower         Pusa Shubhra,          Black rot and Curl
                            Pusa Snowball K-1      blight black rot

        Cowpea              Pusa Komal             Bacterial blight

        Chilli              Pusa Sadabahar         Chilly mosaic virus,
                                                   Tobacco mosaic virus
                                                   and Leaf curl


          Conventional breeding is often constrained by the availability of limited
      number of disease resistance genes that are present and identified in various
      crop varieties or wild relatives. Inducing mutations in plants through diverse
      means and then screening the plant materials for resistance sometimes
      leads to desirable genes being identified. Plants having these desirable
      characters can then be either multiplied directly or can be used in breeding.
      Other breeding methods that are used are selection amongst somaclonal
      variants and genetic engineering.
          Mutation is the process by which genetic variations are created
      through changes in the base sequence within genes (see Chapter 5)
      resulting in the creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental
      type. It is possible to induce mutations artificially through use of chemicals
      or radiations (like gamma radiations), and selecting and using the plants
      that have the desirable character as a source in breeding – this process is
      called mutation breeding. In mung bean, resistance to yellow mosaic
174   virus and powdery mildew were induced by mutations.
          Several wild relatives of different cultivated species of plants have been
      shown to have certain resistant characters but have very low yield. Hence,
      there is a need to introduce the resistant genes into the high-yielding
      cultivated varieties. Resistance to yellow mosaic virus in bhindi
      (Abelmoschus esculentus) was transferred from a wild species and
      resulted in a new variety of A. esculentus called Parbhani kranti.
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


    All the above examples involve sources of resistance genes that are in
the same crop species, which has to be bred for disease resistance, or in a
related wild species. Transfer of resistance genes is achieved by sexual
hybridisation between the target and the source plant followed by
selection.

9.2.3 Plant Breeding for Developing Resistance
      to Insect Pests
Another major cause for large scale destruction of crop plant and crop
produce is insect and pest infestation. Insect resistance in host crop plants
may be due to morphological, biochemical or physiological characteristics.
Hairy leaves in several plants are associated with resistance to insect pests,
e.g, resistance to jassids in cotton and cereal leaf beetle in wheat. In wheat,
solid stems lead to non-preference by the stem sawfly and smooth leaved
and nectar-less cotton varieties do not attract bollworms. High aspartic
acid, low nitrogen and sugar content in maize leads to resistance to maize
stem borers.
    Breeding methods for insect pest resistance involve the same steps as
those for any other agronomic trait such as yield or quality and are as
discussed earlier. Sources of resistance genes may be cultivated varieties,
germplasm collections of the crop or wild relatives.
    Some released crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
insect pest resistance are given in Table 9.2.

                                 Table 9.2
  Crop                     Variety                Insect Pests
  Brassica                 Pusa Gaurav            Aphids
  (rapeseed mustard)

  Flat bean                Pusa Sem 2,            Jassids, aphids and
                           Pusa Sem 3             fruit borer

  Okra (Bhindi)            Pusa Sawani            Shoot and Fruit borer
                           Pusa A-4


9.2.4 Plant Breeding for Improved Food Quality
More than 840 million people in the world do not have adequate food to
meet their daily food and nutritional requirements. A far greater number –        175
three billion people – suffer from micronutrient, protein and vitamin
deficiencies or ‘hidden hunger’ because they cannot afford to buy enough
fruits, vegetables, legumes, fish and meat. Diets lacking essential
micronutrients – particularly iron, vitamin A, iodine and zinc – increase
the risk for disease, reduce lifespan and reduce mental abilities.
                                                                          BIOLOGY


      Biofortification – breeding crops with higher levels of vitamins and
      minerals, or higher protein and healthier fats – is the most practical
      means to improve public health.
         Breeding for improved nutritional quality is undertaken with the
      objectives of improving –
             (i)   Protein content and quality;
            (ii)   Oil content and quality;
           (iii)   Vitamin content; and
           (iv)    Micronutrient and mineral content.
          In 2000, maize hybrids that had twice the amount of the amino acids,
      lysine and tryptophan, compared to existing maize hybrids were
      developed. Wheat variety, Atlas 66, having a high protein content, has
      been used as a donor for improving cultivated wheat. It has been possible
      to develop an iron-fortified rice variety containing over five times as much
      iron as in commonly consumed varieties.
          The Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi has also released
      several vegetable crops that are rich in vitamins and minerals, e.g., vitamin
      A enriched carrots, spinach, pumpkin; vitamin C enriched bitter gourd,
      bathua, mustard, tomato; iron and calcium enriched spinach and bathua;
      and protein enriched beans – broad, lablab, French and garden peas.

      9.3 SINGLE CELL PROTEIN (SCP)
      Conventional agricultural production of cereals, pulses, vegetables, fruits,
      etc., may not be able to meet the demand of food at the rate at which
      human and animal population is increasing. The shift from grain to meat
      diets also creates more demand for cereals as it takes 3-10 Kg of grain to
      produce 1 Kg of meat by animal farming. Can you explain this statement
      in the light of your knowledge of food chains? More than 25 per cent of
      human population is suffering from hunger and malnutrition. One of the
      alternate sources of proteins for animal and human nutrition is Single
      Cell Protein (SCP).
          Microbes are being grown on an industrial scale as source of good
      protein. Microbes like Spirulina can be grown easily on materials like
      waste water from potato processing plants (containing starch), straw,
      molasses, animal manure and even sewage, to produce large quantities
      and can serve as food rich in protein, minerals, fats, carbohydrate and
176   vitamins. Incidentally such utilisation also reduces environmental
      pollution.
          It has been calculated that a 250 Kg cow produces 200 g of protein
      per day. In the same period, 250g of a micro-organism like Methylophilus
      methylotrophus, because of its high rate of biomass production and
      growth, can be expected to produce 25 tonnes of protein. The fact that
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION


mushrooms are eaten by many people and large scale mushroom culture
is a growing industry makes it believable that microbes too would
become acceptable as food.

9.4 TISSUE CULTURE
As traditional breeding techniques failed to keep pace with demand and
to provide sufficiently fast and efficient systems for crop improvement,
another technology called tissue culture got developed. What does
tissue culture mean? It was learnt by scientists, during 1950s, that
whole plants could be regenerated from explants, i.e., any part of a
plant taken out and grown in a test tube, under sterile conditions in
special nutrient media. This capacity to generate a whole plant from
any cell/explant is called totipotency. You will learn how to accomplish
this in higher classes. It is important to stress here that the nutrient
medium must provide a carbon source such as sucrose and also
inorganic salts, vitamins, amino acids and growth regulators like auxins,
cytokinins etc. By application of these methods it is possible to achieve
propagation of a large number of plants in very short durations. This
method of producing thousands of plants through tissue culture is
called micro-propagation. Each of these plants will be genetically
identical to the original plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are
somaclones. Many important food plants like tomato, banana, apple,
etc., have been produced on commercial scale using this method. Try
to visit a tissue culture laboratory with your teacher to better understand
and appreciate the process.
    Another important application of the method is the recovery of healthy
plants from diseased plants. Although the plant is infected with a virus,
the meristem (apical and axillary) is free of virus. Hence, one can remove
the meristem and grow it in vitro to obtain virus-free plants. Scientists
have succeeded in culturing meristems of banana, sugarcane, potato, etc.
    Scientists have even isolated single cells from plants and after
digesting their cell walls have been able to isolate naked protoplasts
(surrounded by plasma membranes). Isolated protoplasts from two
different varieties of plants – each having a desirable character – can be
fused to get hybrid protoplasts, which can be further grown to form a
new plant. These hybrids are called somatic hybrids while the process
is called somatic hybridisation. Imagine a situation when a protoplast
                                                                              177
of tomato is fused with that of potato, and then they are grown – to form
new hybrid plants combining tomato and potato characteristics. Well,
this has been achieved – resulting in formation of pomato; unfortunately
this plant did not have all the desired combination of characteristics
for its commercial utilisation.
                                                                           BIOLOGY




                                    SUMMARY
        Animal husbandry is the practice of taking care and breeding domestic
        animals by applying scientific principles. The ever-increasing demand
        of food from animals and animal products both in terms of quality and
        quantity has been met by good animal husbandry practices. These
        practices include (i) management of farm and farm animals, and (ii)
        animal breeding. In view of the high nutritive value of honey and its
        medicinal importance, there has been a remarkable growth in the practice
        of bee-keeping or apiculture. Fishery is another flourishing industry
        meeting the ever-increasing demand for fish, fish products and other
        aquatic foods.
             Plant breeding may be used to create varieties, which are resistant
        to pathogens and to insect pests. This increases the yield of the food.
        This method has also been used to increase the protein content of the
        plant foods and thereby enhance the quality of food. In India, several
        varieties of different crop plants have been produced. All these measures
        enhance the production of food. Techniques of tissue culture and
        somatic hybridisation offer vast potential for manipulation of plants in
        vitro to produce new varieties.




                            EXERCISES
       1. Explain in brief the role of animal husbandry in human welfare.
       2. If your family owned a dairy farm, what measures would you undertake
          to improve the quality and quantity of milk production?
       3. What is meant by the term ‘breed’? What are the objectives of animal
          breeding?
       4. Name the methods employed in animal breeding. According to you which
          of the methods is best? Why?
       5. What is apiculture? How is it important in our lives?
       6. Discuss the role of fishery in enhancement of food production.
       7. Briefly describe various steps involved in plant breeding.
       8. Explain what is meant by biofortification.
178    9. Which part of the plant is best suited for making virus-free plants and
          why?
      10. What is the major advantage of producing plants by micropropagation?
      11. Find out what the various components of the medium used for
          propagation of an explant in vitro are?
      12. Name any five hybrid varieties of crop plants which have been developed
          in India.
                                Diversity is not only a characteristic of living organisms but
Chapter 13
                                also of content in biology textbooks. Biology is presented either
Organisms and Populations
                                as botany, zoology and microbiology or as classical and
                                modern. The latter is a euphemism for molecular aspects of
Chapter 14
                                biology. Luckily we have many threads which weave the
Ecosystem
                                different areas of biological information into a unifying
                                principle. Ecology is one such thread which gives us a holistic
Chapter 15
                                perspective to biology. The essence of biological understanding
Biodiversity and Conservation
                                is to know how organisms, while remaining an individual,
                                interact with other organisms and physical habitats as a group
Chapter 16
                                and hence behave like organised wholes, i.e., population,
Environmental Issues
                                community, ecosystem or even as the whole biosphere.
                                Ecology explains to us all this. A particular aspect of this is the
                                study of anthropogenic environmental degradation and the
                                socio-political issues it has raised. This unit describes as well as
                                takes a critical view of the above aspects.




                                                                                                2017-18
               Ramdeo Misra is revered as the Father of Ecology in India. Born on 26 August
               1908, Ramdeo Misra obtained Ph.D in Ecology (1937) under Prof. W. H. Pearsall,
               FRS, from Leeds University in UK. He established teaching and research in
               ecology at the Department of Botany of the Banaras Hindu University,
               Varanasi. His research laid the foundations for understanding of tropical
               communities and their succession, environmental responses of plant
               populations and productivity and nutrient cycling in tropical forest and
               grassland ecosystems. Misra formulated the first postgraduate course in
               ecology in India. Over 50 scholars obtained Ph. D degree under his supervision
               and moved on to other universities and research institutes to initiate ecology
               teaching and research across the country.
                    He was honoured with the Fellowships of the Indian National Science
RAMDEO MISRA   Academy and World Academy of Arts and Science, and the prestigious Sanjay
 (1908-1998)
               Gandhi Award in Environment and Ecology. Due to his efforts, the
               Government of India established the National Committee for Environmental
               Planning and Coordination (1972) which, in later years, paved the way
               for the establishment of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (1984).




                                                                                     2017-18
CHAPTER 13

ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


13.1 Organism and Its
     Environment
13.2 Populations        Our living world is fascinatingly diverse and amazingly
                        complex. We can try to understand its complexity by
                        investigating processes at various levels of biological
                        organisation–macromolecules, cells, tissues, organs,
                        individual organisms, population, communities and
                        ecosystems and biomes. At any level of biological
                        organisation we can ask two types of questions – for
                        example, when we hear the bulbul singing early morning
                        in the garden, we may ask – ‘How does the bird sing ?’
                        Or, ‘Why does the bird sing ?’ The ‘how-type’ questions
                        seek the mechanism behind the process while the ‘why-
                        type’ questions seek the significance of the process. For
                        the first question in our example, the answer might be in
                        terms of the operation of the voice box and the vibrating
                        bone in the bird, whereas for the second question the
                        answer may lie in the bird’s need to communicate with its
                        mate during breeding season. When you observe nature
                        around you with a scientific frame of mind you will
                        certainly come up with many interesting questions of both
                        types - Why are night-blooming flowers generally white?
                        How does the bee know which flower has nectar? Why
                        does cactus have so many thorns? How does the chick
                        recognise her own mother ?, and so on.




                                                                             2017-18
                                                                                     BIOLOGY


                     You have already learnt in previous classes that Ecology is a subject
                  which studies the interactions among organisms and between the
                  organism and its physical (abiotic) environment.
                     Ecology is basically concerned with four levels of biological
                  organisation – organisms, populations, communities and biomes. In this
                  chapter we explore ecology at organismic and population levels.

                  13.1 ORGANISM        AND   ITS ENVIRONMENT
                  Ecology at the organismic level is essentially physiological ecology which
                  tries to understand how different organisms are adapted to their
                  environments in terms of not only survival but also reproduction. You
                  may have learnt in earlier classes how the rotation of our planet around
                  the Sun and the tilt of its axis cause annual variations in the intensity
                  and duration of temperature, resulting in distinct seasons. These
                  variations together with annual variation in precipitation (remember
                  precipitation includes both rain and snow) account for the formation of
                  major biomes such as desert, rain forest and tundra (Figure 13.1).




      Figure 13.1 Biome distribution with respect to annual temperature and precipitation

                  Regional and local variations within each biome lead to the formation of a
                  wide variety of habitats. Major biomes of India are shown in Figure 13.2.
220               On planet Earth, life exists not just in a few favourable habitats but even
                  in extreme and harsh habitats – scorching Rajasthan desert, perpetually
                  rain-soaked Meghalaya forests, deep ocean trenches, torrential streams,
                  permafrost polar regions, high mountain tops, boiling thermal springs,
                  and stinking compost pits, to name a few. Even our intestine is a unique
                  habitat for hundreds of species of microbes.




                                                                                     2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS




                        (a)                                              (b)




                        (c)                                              (d)

 Figure 13.2 Major biomes of India : (a) Tropical rain forest; (b) Deciduous forest;
             (c) Desert; (d) Sea coast

    What are the key elements that lead to so much variation in the
physical and chemical conditions of different habitats? The most
important ones are temperature, water, light and soil. We must remember
that the physico-chemical (abiotic) components alone do not characterise
the habitat of an organism completely; the habitat includes biotic
components also – pathogens, parasites, predators and competitors – of
the organism with which they interact constantly. We assume that over a
period of time, the organism had through natural selection, evolved
adaptations to optimise its survival and reproduction in its habitat. (Please
see Page 290 also)

13.1.1 Major Abiotic Factors
Temperature: Temperature is the most ecologically relevant
environmental factor. You are aware that the average temperature on
land varies seasonally, decreases progressively from the equator towards
the poles and from plains to the mountain tops. It ranges from subzero                 221
levels in polar areas and high altitudes to >500C in tropical deserts in
summer. There are, however, unique habitats such as thermal springs
and deep-sea hydrothermal vents where average temperatures exceed
1000 C. It is general knowledge that mango trees do not and cannot grow
in temperate countries like Canada and Germany, snow leopards are not
found in Kerala forests and tuna fish are rarely caught beyond tropical




                                                                                       2017-18
                                                                            BIOLOGY


      latitudes in the ocean. You can readily appreciate the significance of
      temperature to living organisms when you realise that it affects the kinetics
      of enzymes and through it the basal metabolism, activity and other
      physiological functions of the organism. A few organisms can tolerate and
      thrive in a wide range of temperatures (they are called eurythermal), but, a
      vast majority of them are restricted to a narrow range of temperatures (such
      organisms are called stenothermal ). The levels of thermal tolerance of
      different species determine to a large extent their geographical distribution.
      Can you think of a few eurythermal and stenothermal animals and
      plants?
           In recent years, there has been a growing concern about the gradually
      increasing average global temperatures (Chapter 16 ). If this trend
      continues, would you expect the distributional range of some species to
      be affected?
      Water: Next to temperature, water is the most important factor influencing
      the life of organisms. In fact, life on earth originated in water and is
      unsustainable without water. Its availability is so limited in deserts that
      only special adaptations make it possible to live there. The productivity
      and distribution of plants is also heavily dependent on water. You might
      think that organisms living in oceans, lakes and rivers should not face
      any water-related problems, but it is not true. For aquatic organisms the
      quality (chemical composition, pH) of water becomes important. The salt
      concentration (measured as salinity in parts per thousand), is less than
      5 in inland waters, 30-35 in the sea and > 100 in some hypersaline
      lagoons. Some organisms are tolerant of a wide range of salinities
      (euryhaline) but others are restricted to a narrow range (stenohaline).
      Many freshwater animals cannot live for long in sea water and vice versa
      because of the osmotic problems, they would face.
      Light: Since plants produce food through photosynthesis, a process which
      is only possible when sunlight is available as a source of energy, we can
      quickly understand the importance of light for living organisms,
      particularly autotrophs. Many species of small plants (herbs and shrubs)
      growing in forests are adapted to photosynthesise optimally under very
      low light conditions because they are constantly overshadowed by tall,
      canopied trees. Many plants are also dependent on sunlight to meet their
      photoperiodic requirement for flowering. For many animals too, light is
      important in that they use the diurnal and seasonal variations in light
      intensity and duration (photoperiod) as cues for timing their foraging,
      reproductive and migratory activities. The availability of light on land is
222   closely linked with that of temperature since the sun is the source for
      both. But, deep (>500m) in the oceans, the environment is perpetually
      dark and its inhabitants are not aware of the existence of a celestial source
      of energy called Sun. What, then is their source of energy?. The spectral
      quality of solar radiation is also important for life. The UV component of
      the spectrum is harmful to many organisms while not all the colour
      components of the visible spectrum are available for marine plants living




                                                                            2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


at different depths of the ocean. Among the red, green and brown algae
that inhabit the sea, which is likely to be found in the deepest waters?
Why?
Soil: The nature and properties of soil in different places vary; it is
dependent on the climate, the weathering process, whether soil is
transported or sedimentary and how soil development occurred. Various
characteristics of the soil such as soil composition, grain size and
aggregation determine the percolation and water holding capacity of the
soils. These characteristics along with parameters such as pH, mineral
composition and topography determine to a large extent the vegetation in
any area. This in turn dictates the type of animals that can be supported.
Similarly, in the aquatic environment, the sediment-characteristics often
determine the type of benthic animals that can thrive there.

13.1.2 Responses to Abiotic Factors
Having realised that the abiotic conditions of many habitats may vary
drastically in time, we now ask–how do the organisms living in such
habitats cope or manage with stressful conditions? But before attempting
to answer this question, we should perhaps ask first why a highly variable
external environment should bother organisms after all. One would expect
that during the course of millions of years of their existence, many species
would have evolved a relatively constant internal (within the body)
environment that permits all biochemical reactions and physiological
functions to proceed with maximal
efficiency and thus, enhance the overall
‘fitness’ of the species. This constancy, for
example, could be in terms of optimal
temperature and osmotic concentration of
body fluids. Ideally then, the organism
should try to maintain the constancy of its
internal environment (a process called
homeostasis) despite varying external
environmental conditions that tend to
upset its homeostasis. Let us take an
analogy to clarify this important concept.
Suppose a person is able to perform his/
her best when the temperature is 250C and           Figure 13.3 Diagrammatic representation of
wishes to maintain it so, even when it is                        organismic response
scorchingly hot or freezingly cold outside.
It could be achieved at home, in the car while travelling, and at workplace               223
by using an air conditioner in summer and heater in winter. Then his/
her performance would be always maximal regardless of the weather
around him/her. Here the person’s homeostasis is accomplished, not
through physiological, but artificial means. How do other living
organisms cope with the situation? Let us look at various possibilities
(Figure 13.3).




                                                                                          2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


       (i) Regulate : Some organisms are able to maintain homeostasis by
           physiological (sometimes behavioural also) means which ensures
           constant body temperature, constant osmotic concentration, etc.
           All birds and mammals, and a very few lower vertebrate and
           invertebrate species are indeed capable of such regulation
           (thermoregulation and osmoregulation). Evolutionary biologists
           believe that the ‘success’ of mammals is largely due to their ability
           to maintain a constant body temperature and thrive whether they
           live in Antarctica or in the Sahara desert.
                 The mechanisms used by most mammals to regulate their body
           temperature are similar to the ones that we humans use. We maintain
           a constant body temperature of 370C. In summer, when outside
           temperature is more than our body temperature, we sweat profusely.
           The resulting evaporative cooling, similar to what happens with a
           desert cooler in operation, brings down the body temperature. In
           winter when the temperature is much lower than 370C, we start to
           shiver, a kind of exercise which produces heat and raises the body
           temperature. Plants, on the other hand, do not have such
           mechanisms to maintain internal temperatures.
      (ii) Conform : An overwhelming majority (99 per cent) of animals and
           nearly all plants cannot maintain a constant internal environment.
           Their body temperature changes with the ambient temperature. In
           aquatic animals, the osmotic concentration of the body fluids
           change with that of the ambient water osmotic concentration. These
           animals and plants are simply conformers. Considering the benefits
           of a constant internal environment to the organism, we must ask
           why these conformers had not evolved to become regulators. Recall
           the human analogy we used above; much as they like, how many
           people can really afford an air conditioner? Many simply ‘sweat it
           out’ and resign themselves to suboptimal performance in hot
           summer months. Thermoregulation is energetically expensive for
           many organisms. This is particularly true for small animals like
           shrews and humming birds. Heat loss or heat gain is a function of
           surface area. Since small animals have a larger surface area relative
           to their volume, they tend to lose body heat very fast when it is cold
           outside; then they have to expend much energy to generate body
           heat through metabolism. This is the main reason why very small
           animals are rarely found in polar regions. During the course of
224        evolution, the costs and benefits of maintaining a constant internal
           environment are taken into consideration. Some species have evolved
           the ability to regulate, but only over a limited range of environmental
           conditions, beyond which they simply conform.
                 If the stressful external conditions are localised or remain only
           for a short duration, the organism has two other alternatives.




                                                                          2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


 (iii) Migrate : The organism can move away temporarily from the
       stressful habitat to a more hospitable area and return when stressful
       period is over. In human analogy, this strategy is like a person
       moving from Delhi to Shimla for the duration of summer. Many
       animals, particularly birds, during winter undertake long-distance
       migrations to more hospitable areas. Every winter the famous
       Keolado National Park (Bharatpur) in Rajasthan host thousands of
       migratory birds coming from Siberia and other extremely cold
       northern regions.
 (iv) Suspend: In bacteria, fungi and lower plants, various kinds of thick-
       walled spores are formed which help them to survive unfavourable
       conditions – these germinate on availability of suitable environment.
       In higher plants, seeds and some other vegetative reproductive
       structures serve as means to tide over periods of stress besides helping
       in dispersal – they germinate to form new plants under favourable
       moisture and temperature conditions. They do so by reducing their
       metabolic activity and going into a state of ‘dormancy’.
           In animals, the organism, if unable to migrate, might avoid the
       stress by escaping in time. The familiar case of bears going into
       hibernation during winter is an example of escape in time. Some
       snails and fish go into aestivation to avoid summer–related
       problems-heat and dessication. Under unfavourable conditions
       many zooplankton species in lakes and ponds are known to enter
       diapause, a stage of suspended development.

13.1.3 Adaptations
While considering the various alternatives available to organisms for
coping with extremes in their environment, we have seen that some are
able to respond through certain physiological adjustments while others
do so behaviourally (migrating temporarily to a less stressful habitat).
These responses are also actually, their adaptations. So, we can say that
adaptation is any attribute of the organism (morphological, physiological,
behavioural) that enables the organism to survive and reproduce in its
habitat. Many adaptations have evolved over a long evolutionary time
and are genetically fixed. In the absence of an external source of water,
the kangaroo rat in North American deserts is capable of meeting all its
water requirements through its internal fat oxidation (in which water is
a by product). It also has the ability to concentrate its urine so that
minimal volume of water is used to remove excretory products.
    Many desert plants have a thick cuticle on their leaf surfaces and
                                                                                  225
have their stomata arranged in deep pits to minimise water loss through
transpiration. They also have a special photosynthetic pathway (CAM)
that enables their stomata to remain closed during day time. Some desert
plants like Opuntia, have no leaves – they are reduced to spines–and the
photosynthetic function is taken over by the flattened stems.




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY


          Mammals from colder climates generally have shorter ears and limbs
      to minimise heat loss. (This is called the Allen’s Rule.) In the polar seas
      aquatic mammals like seals have a thick layer of fat (blubber) below their
      skin that acts as an insulator and reduces loss of body heat.
          Some organisms possess adaptations that are physiological which
      allow them to respond quickly to a stressful situation. If you had ever
      been to any high altitude place (>3,500m Rohtang Pass near Manali and
      Mansarovar, in China occupied Tibet) you must have experienced what
      is called altitude sickness. Its symptoms include nausea, fatigue and
      heart palpitations. This is because in the low atmospheric pressure of
      high altitudes, the body does not get enough oxygen. But, gradually you
      get acclimatised and stop experiencing altitude sickness. How did your
      body solve this problem? The body compensates low oxygen availability
      by increasing red blood cell production, decreasing the binding affinity
      of hemoglobin and by increasing breathing rate. Many tribes live in the
      high altitude of Himalayas. Find out if they normally have a higher red
      blood cell count (or total hemoglobin) than people living in the plains.
          In most animals, the metabolic reactions and hence all the
      physiological functions proceed optimally in a narrow temperature range
      (in humans, it is 370C). But there are microbes (archaebacteria) that
      flourish in hot springs and deep sea hydrothermal vents where
      temperatures far exceed 1000C. How is this possible?
          Many fish thrive in Antarctic waters where the temperature is always
      below zero. How do they manage to keep their body fluids from freezing?
          A large variety of marine invertebrates and fish live at great depths in
      the ocean where the pressure could be >100 times the normal atmospheric
      pressure that we experience. How do they live under such crushing
      pressures and do they have any special enzymes? Organisms living in
      such extreme environments show a fascinating array of biochemical
      adaptations.
          Some organisms show behavioural responses to cope with variations
      in their environment. Desert lizards lack the physiological ability that
      mammals have to deal with the high temperatures of their habitat, but
      manage to keep their body temperature fairly constant by behavioural
      means. They bask in the sun and absorb heat when their body
      temperature drops below the comfort zone, but move into shade when
      the ambient temperature starts increasing. Some species are capable of
      burrowing into the soil to hide and escape from the above-ground heat.

226   13.2 POPULATIONS
      13.2.1 Population Attributes
      In nature, we rarely find isolated, single individuals of any species; majority
      of them live in groups in a well defined geographical area, share or compete
      for similar resources, potentially interbreed and thus constitute a




                                                                             2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


population. Although the term interbreeding implies sexual reproduction,
a group of individuals resulting from even asexual reproduction is also
generally considered a population for the purpose of ecological studies.
All the cormorants in a wetland, rats in an abandoned dwelling, teakwood
trees in a forest tract, bacteria in a culture plate and lotus plants in a
pond, are some examples of a population. In earlier chapters you have
learnt that although an individual organism is the one that has to cope
with a changed environment, it is at the population level that natural
selection operates to evolve the desired traits. Population ecology is,
therefore, an important area of ecology because it links ecology to
population genetics and evolution.
     A population has certain attributes that an individual organism does
not. An individual may have births and deaths, but a population has birth
rates and death rates. In a population these rates refer to per capita births
and deaths, respectively. The rates, hence, expressed is change in numbers
(increase or decrease) with respect to members of the population. Here is an
example. If in a pond there are 20 lotus plants last year and through
reproduction 8 new plants are added, taking the current population to 28,
we calculate the birth rate as 8/20 = 0.4 offspring per lotus per year. If 4
individuals in a laboratory population of 40 fruitflies died during a specified
time interval, say a week, the death rate in the population during that period
is 4/40 = 0.1 individuals per fruitfly per week.
     Another attribute characteristic of a population is sex ratio. An
individual is either a male or a female but a population has a sex ratio
(e.g., 60 per cent of the population are females and 40 per cent males).
     A population at any given time is composed of individuals of different
ages. If the age distribution (per cent individuals of a given age or age
group) is plotted for the population, the resulting structure is called an
age pyramid (Figure 13.4). For human population, the age pyramids
generally show age distribution of males and females in a combined
diagram. The shape of the pyramids reflects the growth status of the
population - (a) whether it is growing, (b) stable or (c) declining.




                                                                                  227
           Figure 13.4 Representation of age pyramids for human population


    The size of the population tells us a lot about its status in the habitat.
Whatever ecological processes we wish to investigate in a population, be
it the outcome of competition with another species, the impact of a




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                           BIOLOGY


      predator or the effect of a pesticide application, we always evaluate them
      in terms of any change in the population size. The size, in nature, could
      be as low as <10 (Siberian cranes at Bharatpur wetlands in any year) or
      go into millions (Chlamydomonas in a pond). Population size, more
      technically called population density (designated as N), need not
      necessarily be measured in numbers only. Although total number is
      generally the most appropriate measure of population density, it is in
      some cases either meaningless or difficult to determine. In an area, if
      there are 200 Parthenium plants but only a single huge banyan tree with
      a large canopy, stating that the population density of banyan is low relative
      to that of Parthenium amounts to underestimating the enormous role of
      the Banyan in that community. In such cases, the per cent cover or biomass
      is a more meaningful measure of the population size. Total number is
      again not an easily adoptable measure if the population is huge and
      counting is impossible or very time-consuming. If you have a dense
      laboratory culture of bacteria in a petri dish what is the best measure to
      report its density? Sometimes, for certain ecological investigations, there
      is no need to know the absolute population densities; relative densities
      serve the purpose equally well. For instance, the number of fish caught
      per trap is good enough measure of its total population density in the lake.
      We are mostly obliged to estimate population sizes indirectly, without
      actually counting them or seeing them. The tiger census in our national
      parks and tiger reserves is often based on pug marks and fecal pellets.

      13.2.2 Population Growth
      The size of a population for any species is not a static parameter. It keeps
      changing in time, depending on various factors including food availability,
      predation pressure and adverse weather. In fact, it is these changes in
      population density that give us some idea of what is happening to the
      population – whether it is flourishing or declining. Whatever might be
      the ultimate reasons, the density of a population in a given habitat during
      a given period, fluctuates due to changes in four basic processes, two of
      which (natality and immigration) contribute to an increase in population
      density and two (mortality and emigration) to a decrease.
         (i) Natality refers to the number of births during a given period in the
             population that are added to the initial density.
        (ii) Mortality is the number of deaths in the population during a given
             period.
228    (iii) Immigration is the number of individuals of the same species that
             have come into the habitat from elsewhere during the time period
             under consideration.
       (iv) Emigration is the number of individuals of the population who
             left the habitat and gone elsewhere during the time period under
             consideration.




                                                                           2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS




So, if N is the population density at time t, then its density at time t +1 is
                         Nt+1 = Nt + [(B + I) – (D + E)]
    You can see from the above equation that population density will
increase if the number of births plus the number of immigrants (B + I) is
more than the number of deaths plus the number of emigrants (D + E),
otherwise it will decrease. Under normal conditions, births and deaths
are the most important factors influencing population density, the other
two factors assuming importance only under special conditions. For
instance, if a new habitat is just being colonised, immigration may
contribute more significantly to population growth than birth rates.
Growth Models : Does the growth of a population with time show any
specific and predictable pattern? We have been concerned about unbridled
human population growth and problems created by it in our country
and it is therefore natural for us to be curious if different animal
populations in nature behave the same way or show some restraints on
growth. Perhaps we can learn a lesson or two from nature on how to
control population growth.
  (i) Exponential growth : Resource (food and space) availability is
       obviously essential for the unimpeded growth of a population.              229
       Ideally, when resources in the habitat are unlimited, each species
       has the ability to realise fully its innate potential to grow in number,
       as Darwin observed while developing his theory of natural selection.
       Then the population grows in an exponential or geometric fashion.
       If in a population of size N, the birth rates (not total number but




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                                                 BIOLOGY


                            per capita births) are represented as b and death rates (again, per
                            capita death rates) as d, then the increase or decrease in N during a
                            unit time period t (dN/dt) will be
                                   dN/dt = (b – d) × N
                                   Let (b–d) = r, then
                                   dN/dt = rN
                            The r in this equation is called the ‘intrinsic rate of natural increase’
                            and is a very important parameter chosen for assessing impacts of
                            any biotic or abiotic factor on population growth.
                               To give you some idea about the magnitude of r values, for the
                            Norway rat the r is 0.015, and for the flour beetle it is 0.12. In
                            1981, the r value for human population in India was 0.0205. Find
                            out what the current r value is. For calculating it, you need to
                            know the birth rates and death rates.
                               The above equation describes the exponential or geometric growth
                            pattern of a population (Figure 13.5) and results in a J-shaped curve
                            when we plot N in relation to time. If you are familiar with basic
                                             calculus, you can derive the integral form of the
                                             exponential growth equation as
                                                     Nt = N0 ert
                                               where
                                                       Nt = Population density after time t
                                                       N0 = Population density at time zero
                                                       r = intrinsic rate of natural increase
                                                       e = the base of natural logarithms (2.71828)
                                                Any species growing exponentially under unlimited
                                                resource conditions can reach enormous population
                                                densities in a short time. Darwin showed how even
 Figure 13.5 Population growth curve            a slow growing animal like elephant could reach
             a when responses are not           enormous numbers in the absence of checks. The
             limiting the growth, plot is       following is an anecdote popularly narrated to
             exponential,
             b when responses are limiting      demonstrate dramatically how fast a huge
             the growth, plot is logistic,      population could build up when growing
             K is carrying capacity             exponentially.
                        The king and the minister sat for a chess game. The king, confident
                        of winning the game, was ready to accept any bet proposed by the
230                     minister. The minister humbly said that if he won, he wanted only
                        some wheat grains, the quantity of which is to be calculated by placing
                        on the chess board one grain in Square 1, then two in Square 2,
                        then four in Square 3, and eight in Square 4, and so on, doubling each
                        time the previous quantity of wheat on the next square until all the 64
                        squares were filled. The king accepted the seemingly silly bet and started
                        the game, but unluckily for him, the minister won. The king felt that fulfilling




                                                                                                 2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


 the minister’s bet was so easy. He started with a single grain on
 the first square and proceeded to fill the other squares following
 minister’s suggested procedure, but by the time he covered half the
 chess board, the king realised to his dismay that all the wheat
 produced in his entire kingdom pooled together would still be
 inadequate to cover all the 64 squares. Now think of a tiny
 Paramecium starting with just one individual and through binary
 fission, doubling in numbers every day, and imagine what a mind-
 boggling population size it would reach in 64 days. (provided food
 and space remain unlimited)
 (ii) Logistic growth: No population of any species in nature has at its
      disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth. This
      leads to competition between individuals for limited resources.
      Eventually, the ‘fittest’ individual will survive and reproduce. The
      governments of many countries have also realised this fact and
      introduced various restraints with a view to limit human population
      growth. In nature, a given habitat has enough resources to support
      a maximum possible number, beyond which no further growth is
      possible. Let us call this limit as nature’s carrying capacity (K) for
      that species in that habitat.
          A population growing in a habitat with limited resources show
      initially a lag phase, followed by phases of acceleration and
      deceleration and finally an asymptote, when the population density
      reaches the carrying capacity. A plot of N in relation to time (t)
      results in a sigmoid curve. This type of population growth is called
      Verhulst-Pearl Logistic Growth (Figure 13.5) and is described by
      the following equation:
                         K −N
              dN/dt = rN     
                          K 
      Where   N = Population density at time t
              r = Intrinsic rate of natural increase
              K = Carrying capacity

          Since resources for growth for most animal populations are finite
      and become limiting sooner or later, the logistic growth model is
      considered a more realistic one.
          Gather from Government Census data the population figures
      for India for the last 100 years, plot them and check which growth
      pattern is evident.                                                      231

13.2.3 Life History Variation
Populations evolve to maximise their reproductive fitness, also called
Darwinian fitness (high r value), in the habitat in which they live. Under
a particular set of selection pressures, organisms evolve towards the most




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                             BIOLOGY


      efficient reproductive strategy. Some organisms breed only once in their
      lifetime (Pacific salmon fish, bamboo) while others breed many times
      during their lifetime (most birds and mammals). Some produce a large
      number of small-sized offspring (Oysters, pelagic fishes) while others
      produce a small number of large-sized offspring (birds, mammals). So,
      which is desirable for maximising fitness? Ecologists suggest that life
      history traits of organisms have evolved in relation to the constraints
      imposed by the abiotic and biotic components of the habitat in which
      they live. Evolution of life history traits in different species is currently an
      important area of research being conducted by ecologists.

      13.2.4 Population Interactions
      Can you think of any natural habitat on earth that is inhabited just by a
      single species? There is no such habitat and such a situation is even
      inconceivable. For any species, the minimal requirement is one more
      species on which it can feed. Even a plant species, which makes its own
      food, cannot survive alone; it needs soil microbes to break down the organic
      matter in soil and return the inorganic nutrients for absorption. And then,
      how will the plant manage pollination without an animal agent? It is
      obvious that in nature, animals, plants and microbes do not and cannot
      live in isolation but interact in various ways to form a biological
      community. Even in minimal communities, many interactive linkages
      exist, although all may not be readily apparent.
          Interspecific interactions arise from the interaction of populations of
      two different species. They could be beneficial, detrimental or neutral
      (neither harm nor benefit) to one of the species or both. Assigning a ‘+’
      sign for beneficial interaction, ‘-’ sign for detrimental and 0 for neutral
      interaction, let us look at all the possible outcomes of interspecific
      interactions (Table13.1).

                      Table 13.1 : Population Interactions
         Species A                 Species B           Name of Interaction

              +                         +                    Mutualism

              –                         –                    Competition

              +                         –                     Predation

              +                         –                    Parasitism
232           +                         0                  Commensalism

              –                         0                    Amensalism

          Both the species benefit in mutualism and both lose in competition in
      their interactions with each other. In both parasitism and predation only
      one species benefits (parasite and predator, respectively) and the interaction




                                                                              2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


is detrimental to the other species (host and prey, respectively).
The interaction where one species is benefitted and the other is neither
benefitted nor harmed is called commensalism. In amensalism on
the other hand one species is harmed whereas the other is
unaffected. Predation, parasitism and commensalism share a common
characteristic– the interacting species live closely together.
  (i) Predation: What would happen to all the energy fixed by
      autotrophic organisms if the community has no animals to eat the
      plants? You can think of predation as nature’s way of transferring
      to higher trophic levels the energy fixed by plants. When we think
      of predator and prey, most probably it is the tiger and the deer that
      readily come to our mind, but a sparrow eating any seed is no less
      a predator. Although animals eating plants are categorised
      separately as herbivores, they are, in a broad ecological context,
      not very different from predators.
            Besides acting as ‘conduits’ for energy transfer across trophic
      levels, predators play other important roles. They keep prey
      populations under control. But for predators, prey species could
      achieve very high population densities and cause ecosystem
      instability. When certain exotic species are introduced into a
      geographical area, they become invasive and start spreading fast
      because the invaded land does not have its natural predators. The
      prickly pear cactus introduced into Australia in the early 1920’s
      caused havoc by spreading rapidly into millions of hectares of
      rangeland. Finally, the invasive cactus was brought under control
      only after a cactus-feeding predator (a moth) from its natural habitat
      was introduced into the country. Biological control methods adopted
      in agricultural pest control are based on the ability of the predator
      to regulate prey population. Predators also help in maintaining
      species diversity in a community, by reducing the intensity of
      competition among competing prey species. In the rocky intertidal
      communities of the American Pacific Coast the starfish Pisaster is
      an important predator. In a field experiment, when all the starfish
      were removed from an enclosed intertidal area, more than 10 species
      of invertebrates became extinct within a year, because of inter-
      specific competition.
          If a predator is too efficient and overexploits its prey, then the
      prey might become extinct and following it, the predator will also       233
      become extinct for lack of food. This is the reason why predators in
      nature are ‘prudent’. Prey species have evolved various defenses to
      lessen the impact of predation. Some species of insects and frogs
      are cryptically-coloured (camouflaged) to avoid being detected easily
      by the predator. Some are poisonous and therefore avoided by the




                                                                               2017-18
                                                                          BIOLOGY


           predators. The Monarch butterfly is highly distasteful to its predator
           (bird) because of a special chemical present in its body.
           Interestingly, the butterfly acquires this chemical during its
           caterpillar stage by feeding on a poisonous weed.
                For plants, herbivores are the predators. Nearly 25 per cent of
           all insects are known to be phytophagous (feeding on plant sap
           and other parts of plants). The problem is particularly severe for
           plants because, unlike animals, they cannot run away from their
           predators. Plants therefore have evolved an astonishing variety of
           morphological and chemical defences against herbivores. Thorns
           (Acacia, Cactus) are the most common morphological means of
           defence. Many plants produce and store chemicals that make the
           herbivore sick when they are eaten, inhibit feeding or digestion,
           disrupt its reproduction or even kill it. You must have seen the
           weed Calotropis growing in abandoned fields. The plant produces
           highly poisonous cardiac glycosides and that is why you never see
           any cattle or goats browsing on this plant. A wide variety of chemical
           substances that we extract from plants on a commercial scale
           (nicotine, caffeine, quinine, strychnine, opium, etc.,) are produced
           by them actually as defences against grazers and browsers.
      (ii) Competition: When Darwin spoke of the struggle for existence and
           survival of the fittest in nature, he was convinced that interspecific
           competition is a potent force in organic evolution. It is generally
           believed that competition occurs when closely related species
           compete for the same resources that are limiting, but this is not
           entirely true. Firstly, totally unrelated species could also compete
           for the same resource. For instance, in some shallow South
           American lakes visiting flamingoes and resident fishes compete for
           their common food, the zooplankton in the lake. Secondly,
           resources need not be limiting for competition to occur; in
           interference competition, the feeding efficiency of one species might
           be reduced due to the interfering and inhibitory presence of the
           other species, even if resources (food and space) are abundant.
           Therefore, competition is best defined as a process in which the
           fitness of one species (measured in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate
           of increase) is significantly lower in the presence of another species.
           It is relatively easy to demonstrate in laboratory experiments, as
           Gause and other experimental ecologists did, when resources are
           limited the competitively superior species will eventually eliminate
234        the other species, but evidence for such competitive exclusion
           occurring in nature is not always conclusive. Strong and persuasive
           circumstantial evidence does exist however in some cases. The
           Abingdon tortoise in Galapagos Islands became extinct within a
           decade after goats were introduced on the island, apparently due
           to the greater browsing efficiency of the goats. Another evidence for




                                                                          2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS


       the occurrence of competition in nature comes from what is called
       ‘competitive release’. A species whose distribution is restricted to a
       small geographical area because of the presence of a competitively
       superior species, is found to expand its distributional range
       dramatically when the competing species is experimentally removed.
       Connell’s elegant field experiments showed that on the rocky sea
       coasts of Scotland, the larger and competitively superior barnacle
       Balanus dominates the intertidal area, and excludes the smaller
       barnacle Chathamalus from that zone. In general, herbivores and
       plants appear to be more adversely affected by competition than
       carnivores.
           Gause’s ‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ states that two
       closely related species competing for the same resources cannot
       co-exist indefinitely and the competitively inferior one will be
       eliminated eventually. This may be true if resources are limiting,
       but not otherwise. More recent studies do not support such gross
       generalisations about competition. While they do not rule out the
       occurrence of interspecific competition in nature, they point out
       that species facing competition might evolve mechanisms that
       promote co-existence rather than exclusion. One such mechanism
       is ‘resource partitioning’. If two species compete for the same
       resource, they could avoid competition by choosing, for instance,
       different times for feeding or different foraging patterns. MacArthur
       showed that five closely related species of warblers living on the
       same tree were able to avoid competition and co-exist due to
       behavioural differences in their foraging activities.
 (iii) Parasitism: Considering that the parasitic mode of life ensures
       free lodging and meals, it is not surprising that parasitism has
       evolved in so many taxonomic groups from plants to higher
       vertebrates. Many parasites have evolved to be host-specific (they
       can parasitise only a single species of host) in such a way that both
       host and the parasite tend to co-evolve; that is, if the host evolves
       special mechanisms for rejecting or resisting the parasite, the
       parasite has to evolve mechanisms to counteract and neutralise
       them, in order to be successful with the same host species. In
       accordance with their life styles, parasites evolved special
       adaptations such as the loss of unnecessary sense organs, presence
       of adhesive organs or suckers to cling on to the host, loss of digestive   235
       system and high reproductive capacity. The life cycles of parasites
       are often complex, involving one or two intermediate hosts or vectors
       to facilitate parasitisation of its primary host. The human liver fluke
       (a trematode parasite) depends on two intermediate hosts (a snail
       and a fish) to complete its life cycle. The malarial parasite needs a




                                                                                  2017-18
                                                                         BIOLOGY


           vector (mosquito) to spread to other hosts. Majority of the parasites
           harm the host; they may reduce the survival, growth and
           reproduction of the host and reduce its population density. They
           might render the host more vulnerable to predation by making it
           physically weak. Do you believe that an ideal parasite should be
           able to thrive within the host without harming it? Then why didn’t
           natural selection lead to the evolution of such totally harmless
           parasites?
               Parasites that feed on the external surface of the host organism
           are called ectoparasites. The most familiar examples of this group
           are the lice on humans and ticks on dogs. Many marine fish are
           infested with ectoparasitic copepods. Cuscuta, a parasitic plant that
           is commonly found growing on hedge plants, has lost its chlorophyll
           and leaves in the course of evolution. It derives its nutrition from
           the host plant which it parasitises. The female mosquito is not
           considered a parasite, although it needs our blood for reproduction.
           Can you explain why?
               In contrast, endoparasites are those that live inside the host
           body at different sites (liver, kidney, lungs, red blood cells, etc.).
           The life cycles of endoparasites are more complex because of their
           extreme specialisation. Their morphological and anatomical features
           are greatly simplified while emphasising their reproductive potential.
               Brood parasitism in birds is a fascinating example of parasitism
           in which the parasitic bird lays its eggs in the nest of its host and
           lets the host incubate them. During the course of evolution, the
           eggs of the parasitic bird have evolved to resemble the host’s egg in
           size and colour to reduce the chances of the host bird detecting the
           foreign eggs and ejecting them from the nest. Try to follow the
           movements of the cuckoo (koel) and the crow in your neighborhood
           park during the breeding season (spring to summer) and watch
           brood parasitism in action.
      (iv) Commensalism: This is the interaction in which one species benefits
           and the other is neither harmed nor benefited. An orchid growing
           as an epiphyte on a mango branch, and barnacles growing on the
           back of a whale benefit while neither the mango tree nor the whale
           derives any apparent benefit. The cattle egret and grazing cattle in
236        close association, a sight you are most likely to catch if you live in
           farmed rural areas, is a classic example of commensalism. The
           egrets always forage close to where the cattle are grazing because
           the cattle, as they move, stir up and flush out from the vegetation
           insects that otherwise might be difficult for the egrets to find and
           catch. Another example of commensalism is the interaction between




                                                                         2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS




                (a)                                           (b)
Figure 13.6   Mutual relationship between fig tree and wasp: (a) Fig flower is pollinated
              by wasp; (b) Wasp laying eggs in a fig fruit

     sea anemone that has stinging tentacles and the clown fish that
     lives among them. The fish gets protection from predators which
     stay away from the stinging tentacles. The anemone does not appear
     to derive any benefit by hosting the clown fish.
 (v) Mutualism: This interaction confers benefits on both the interacting
     species. Lichens represent an intimate mutualistic relationship
     between a fungus and photosynthesising algae or cyanobacteria.
     Similarly, the mycorrhizae are associations between fungi and the
     roots of higher plants. The fungi help the plant in the absorption of
     essential nutrients from the soil while the plant in turn provides the
     fungi with energy-yielding carbohydrates.
         The most spectacular and evolutionarily fascinating examples
     of mutualism are found in plant-animal relationships. Plants need
     the help of animals for pollinating their flowers and dispersing their
     seeds. Animals obviously have to be paid ‘fees’ for the services that
     plants expect from them. Plants offer rewards or fees in the form of
     pollen and nectar for pollinators and juicy and nutritious fruits for
     seed dispersers. But the mutually beneficial system should also
     be safeguarded against ‘cheaters’, for example, animals that try to
     steal nectar without aiding in pollination. Now you can see why
     plant-animal interactions often involve co-evolution of the
     mutualists, that is, the evolutions of the flower and its pollinator
     species are tightly linked with one another. In many species of fig
                                                                                            237
     trees, there is a tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator
     species of wasp (Figure 13.6). It means that a given fig species can
     be pollinated only by its ‘partner’ wasp species and no other species.
     The female wasp uses the fruit not only as an oviposition (egg-laying)
     site but uses the developing seeds within the fruit for nourishing




                                                                                            2017-18
                                                                                              BIOLOGY


                                         its larvae. The wasp pollinates the fig inflorescence while
                                         searching for suitable egg-laying sites. In return for the
                                         favour of pollination the fig offers the wasp some of its
                                         developing seeds, as food for the developing wasp larvae.
                                              Orchids show a bewildering diversity of floral
                                         patterns many of which have evolved to attract the right
                                         pollinator insect (bees and bumblebees) and ensure
                                         guaranteed pollination by it (Figure 13.7). Not all
                                         orchids offer rewards. The Mediterranean orchid
                                         Ophrys employs ‘sexual deceit’ to get pollination done
                                         by a species of bee. One petal of its flower bears an
                                         uncanny resemblance to the female of the bee in size,
                                         colour and markings. The male bee is attracted to what
                                         it perceives as a female, ‘pseudocopulates’ with the
                                         flower, and during that process is dusted with pollen
 Figure 13.7 Showing bee-a pollinator    from the flower. When this same bee ‘pseudocopulates’
             on orchid flower            with another flower, it transfers pollen to it and thus,
                                         pollinates the flower. Here you can see how co-evolution
                      operates. If the female bee’s colour patterns change even slightly for any
                      reason during evolution, pollination success will be reduced unless the
                      orchid flower co-evolves to maintain the resemblance of its petal to the
                      female bee.


                                                      SUMMARY
                           As a branch of biology, Ecology is the study of the relationships of
                           living organisms with the abiotic (physico-chemical factors) and biotic
                           components (other species) of their environment. It is concerned
                           with four levels of biological organisation-organisms, populations,
                           communities and biomes.
                                Temperature, light, water and soil are the most important
                           physical factors of the environment to which the organisms are
                           adapted in various ways. Maintenance of a constant internal
                           environment (homeostasis) by the organisms contributes to optimal
                           performance, but only some organisms (regulators) are capable of
                           homeostasis in the face of changing external environment. Others
                           either partially regulate their internal environment or simply
                           conform. A few other species have evolved adaptations to avoid
                           unfavourable conditions in space (migration) or in time (aestivation,
                           hibernation, and diapause).
238                             Evolutionary changes through natural selection take place at
                           the population level and hence, population ecology is an important
                           area of ecology. A population is a group of individuals of a given
                           species sharing or competing for similar resources in a defined
                           geographical area. Populations have attributes that individual
                           organisms do not- birth rates and death rates, sex ratio and age




                                                                                              2017-18
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS



     distribution. The proportion of different age groups of males and
     females in a population is often presented graphically as age pyramid;
     its shape indicates whether a population is stationary, growing or
     declining.
          Ecological effects of any factors on a population are generally
     reflected in its size (population density), which may be expressed in
     different ways (numbers, biomass, per cent cover, etc.,) depending
     on the species.
          Populations grow through births and immigration and decline
     through deaths and emigration. When resources are unlimited, the
     growth is usually exponential but when resources become
     progressively limiting, the growth pattern turns logistic. In either
     case, growth is ultimately limited by the carrying capacity of the
     environment. The intrinsic rate of natural increase (r) is a measure
     of the inherent potential of a population to grow.
          In nature populations of different species in a habitat do not live
     in isolation but interact in many ways. Depending on the outcome,
     these interactions between two species are classified as competition
     (both species suffer), predation and parasitism (one benefits and the
     other suffers), commensalism (one benefits and the other is
     unaffected), amensalism (one is harmed, other unaffected) and
     mutualism (both species benefit). Predation is a very important
     process through which trophic energy transfer is facilitated and some
     predators help in controlling their prey populations. Plants have
     evolved diverse morphological and chemical defenses against
     herbivory. In competition, it is presumed that the superior competitor
     eliminates the inferior one (the Competitive Exclusion Principle), but
     many closely related species have evolved various mechanisms which
     facilitate their co-existence. Some of the most fascinating cases of
     mutualism in nature are seen in plant-pollinator interactions.




                        EXERCISES
1.    How is diapause different from hibernation?
2.    If a marine fish is placed in a fresh water aquarium, will the fish be
      able to survive? Why or why not?
3.    Define phenotypic adaptation. Give one example.
4.    Most living organisms cannot survive at temperature above 450C. How
                                                                                 239
      are some microbes able to live in habitats with temperatures exceeding
      1000C?
5.    List the attributes that populations but not individuals possess.
6.    If a population growing exponentially double in size in 3 years, what is
      the intrinsic rate of increase (r) of the population?
7.    Name important defence mechanisms in plants against herbivory.




                                                                                 2017-18
                                                                              BIOLOGY


       8.   An orchid plant is growing on the branch of mango tree. How do you
            describe this interaction between the orchid and the mango tree?
       9.   What is the ecological principle behind the biological control method of
            managing with pest insects?
      10.   Distinguish between the following:
            (a) Hibernation and Aestivation
            (b) Ectotherms and Endotherms
      11.   Write a short note on
            (a) Adaptations of desert plants and animals
            (b) Adaptations of plants to water scarcity
            (c) Behavioural adaptations in animals
            (d) Importance of light to plants
            (e) Effect of temperature or water scarcity and the adaptations of animals.
      12.   List the various abiotic environmental factors.
      13.   Give an example for:
            (a) An endothermic animal
            (b) An ectothermic animal
            (c) An organism of benthic zone
      14.   Define population and community.
      15.   Define the following terms and give one example for each:
            (a) Commensalism
            (b) Parasitism
            (c) Camouflage
            (d) Mutualism
            (e) Interspecific competition
      16.   With the help of suitable diagram describe the logistic population
            growth curve.
      17.   Select the statement which explains best parasitism.
            (a) One organism is benefited.
            (b) Both the organisms are benefited.
            (c) One organism is benefited, other is not affected.
            (d) One organism is benefited, other is affected.
      18.   List any three important characteristics of a population and explain.




240




                                                                               2017-18
CHAPTER 2

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN
FLOWERING PLANTS

2.1   Flower – A Fascinating
      Organ of Angiosperms
2.2   Pre-fertilisation : Structures   Are we not lucky that plants reproduce sexually? The
      and Events                       myriads of flowers that we enjoy gazing at, the scents and
                                       the perfumes that we swoon over, the rich colours that
2.3   Double Fertilisation             attract us, are all there as an aid to sexual reproduction.
2.4   Post-fertilisation: Structures   Flowers do not exist only for us to be used for our own
      and Events                       selfishness. All flowering plants show sexual reproduction.
                                       A look at the diversity of structures of the inflorescences,
2.5   Apomixis and
                                       flowers and floral parts, shows an amazing range of
      Polyembryony
                                       adaptations to ensure formation of the end products of
                                       sexual reproduction, the fruits and seeds. In this chapter,
                                       let us understand the morphology, structure and the
                                       processes of sexual reproduction in flowering plants
                                       (angiosperms).

                                       2.1 FLOWER – A FASCINATING ORGAN OF
                                           ANGIOSPERMS
                                       Human beings have had an intimate relationship with
                                       flowers since time immemorial. Flowers are objects of
                                       aesthetic, ornamental, social, religious and cultural value
                                       – they have always been used as symbols for conveying
                                       important human feelings such as love, affection,
                                       happiness, grief, mourning, etc. List at least five flowers
                                       of ornamental value that are commonly cultivated at
                                                                          BIOLOGY




            Figure 2.1 A diagrammatic representation of L.S. of a flower

     homes and in gardens. Find out the names of five more flowers that are
     used in social and cultural celebrations in your family. Have you heard
     of floriculture – what does it refer to?
          To a biologist, flowers are morphological and embryological marvels
     and the sites of sexual reproduction. In class XI, you have read the various
     parts of a flower. Figure 2.1 will help you recall the parts of a typical
     flower. Can you name the two parts in a flower in which the two most
     important units of sexual reproduction develop?

     2.2 PRE-FERTILISATION: STRUCTURES               AND   EVENTS
     Much before the actual flower is seen on a plant, the decision that the plant
     is going to flower has taken place. Several hormonal and structural changes
     are initiated which lead to the differentiation and further development of
20   the floral primordium. Inflorescences are formed which bear the floral buds
     and then the flowers. In the flower the male and female reproductive
     structures, the androecium and the gynoecium differentiate and develop.
     You would recollect that the androecium consists of a whorl of stamens
     representing the male reproductive organ and the gynoecium represents
     the female reproductive organ.
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

2.2.1 Stamen, Microsporangium and Pollen Grain
Figure 2.2a shows the two parts of a typical stamen – the long and slender
stalk called the filament, and the terminal generally bilobed structure
called the anther. The proximal end of the filament
is attached to the thalamus or the petal of the flower.
The number and length of stamens are variable in
flowers of different species. If you were to collect a
stamen each from ten flowers (each from different
species) and arrange them on a slide, you would
be able to appreciate the large variation in size seen
in nature. Careful observation of each stamen
under a dissecting microscope and making neat
diagrams would elucidate the range in shape and
attachment of anthers in different flowers.
     A typical angiosperm anther is bilobed with
each lobe having two theca, i.e., they are dithecous
(Figure 2.2 b). Often a longitudinal groove runs
lengthwise separating the theca. Let us
understand the various types of tissues and their
organisation in the transverse section of an anther
(Figure 2.3 a). The bilobed nature of an anther is
very distinct in the transverse section of the anther.
The anther is a four-sided (tetragonal) structure
consisting of four microsporangia located at the                              (b)
corners, two in each lobe.
     The microsporangia develop further and                          (a)
become pollen sacs. They extend longitudinally
all through the length of an anther and are packed Figure 2.2 (a) A typical stamen;
with pollen grains.                                              (b) three–dimensional cut section
Structure of microsporangium: In a transverse                    of an anther
section, a typical microsporangium appears near
circular in outline. It is generally surrounded by four wall layers (Figure
2.3 b)– the epidermis, endothecium, middle layers and the tapetum. The
outer three wall layers perform the function of protection and help in
dehiscence of anther to release the pollen. The innermost wall layer is
the tapetum. It nourishes the developing pollen grains. Cells of the
tapetum possess dense cytoplasm and generally have more than one
nucleus. Can you think of how tapetal cells could become bi-nucleate?
     When the anther is young, a group of compactly arranged homogenous                       21
cells called the sporogenous tissue occupies the centre of each
microsporangium.
Microsporogenesis : As the anther develops, the cells of the sporogenous
tissue undergo meiotic divisions to form microspore tetrads. What would
be the ploidy of the cells of the tetrad?
                                                                          BIOLOGY




          As each cell of the sporogenous tissue is capable of giving rise to a
     microspore tetrad. Each one is a potential pollen or microspore mother
     cell. The process of formation of microspores from a pollen mother cell (PMC)
     through meiosis is called microsporogenesis. The microspores, as they
     are formed, are arranged in a cluster of four cells–the microspore tetrad
     (Figure 2.3 a). As the anthers mature and dehydrate, the microspores
     dissociate from each other and develop into pollen grains (Figure 2.3 b).
     Inside each microsporangium several thousands of microspores or pollen
22   grains are formed that are released with the dehiscence of anther
     (Figure 2.3 c).
     Pollen grain: The pollen grains represent the male gametophytes. If you
     touch the opened anthers of Hibiscus or any other flower you would find
     deposition of yellowish powdery pollen grains on your fingers. Sprinkle
     these grains on a drop of water taken on a glass slide and observe under
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION




     Figure 2.4 Scanning electron micrographs of a few pollen grains                  (a)


a microscope. You will really be amazed at the variety of architecture –
sizes, shapes, colours, designs – seen on the pollen grains
from different species (Figure 2.4).
    Pollen grains are generally spherical measuring about
25-50 micrometers in diameter. It has a prominent two-layered
wall. The hard outer layer called the exine is made up of
sporopollenin which is one of the most resistant organic material
known. It can withstand high temperatures and strong acids
and alkali. No enzyme that degrades sporopollenin is so far
known. Pollen grain exine has prominent apertures called germ
pores where sporopollenin is absent. Pollen grains are well-
preserved as fossils because of the presence of sporopollenin.
The exine exhibits a fascinating array of patterns and designs.
Why do you think the exine should be hard? What is the
function of germ pore? The inner wall of the pollen grain is
called the intine. It is a thin and continuous layer made up of
cellulose and pectin. The cytoplasm of pollen grain is
surrounded by a plasma membrane. When the pollen grain is
mature it contains two cells, the vegetative cell and generative
cell (Figure 2.5b). The vegetative cell is bigger, has abundant
food reserve and a large irregularly shaped nucleus. The
generative cell is small and floats in the cytoplasm of the                         (b)
vegetative cell. It is spindle shaped with dense cytoplasm and    Figure 2.5 (a) Enlarged view of
                                                                  a pollen grain tetrad; (b) stages
a nucleus. In over 60 per cent of angiosperms, pollen grains      of a microspore maturing into a
are shed at this 2-celled stage. In the remaining species, the    pollen grain
generative cell divides mitotically to give rise to the two male
gametes before pollen grains are shed (3-celled stage).                                        23
    Pollen grains of many species cause severe allergies and bronchial
afflictions in some people often leading to chronic respiratory
disorders – asthma, bronchitis, etc. It may be mentioned that Parthenium
or carrot grass that came into India as a contaminant with imported wheat,
has become ubiquitous in occurrence and causes pollen allergy.
                                                                           BIOLOGY


         Pollen grains are rich in nutrients. It has become a fashion in recent
     years to use pollen tablets as food supplements. In western countries, a
     large number of pollen products in the form of tablets and syrups are
     available in the market. Pollen consumption has been claimed to increase
     the performance of athletes and race horses (Figure 2.6).




                 Figure 2.6 Pollen products


         When once they are shed, pollen grains have to land on the stigma
     before they lose viability if they have to bring about fertilisation. How long
     do you think the pollen grains retain viability? The period for which pollen
     grains remain viable is highly variable and to some extent depends on the
     prevailing temperature and humidity. In some cereals such as rice and
     wheat, pollen grains lose viability within 30 minutes of their release, and
     in some members of Rosaceae, Leguminoseae and Solanaceae, they
     maintain viability for months. You may have heard of storing semen/
     sperms of many animals including humans for artificial insemination. It
     is possible to store pollen grains of a large number of species for years in
     liquid nitrogen (-1960C). Such stored pollen can be used as pollen banks,
     similar to seed banks, in crop breeding programmes.

     2.2.2 The Pistil, Megasporangium (ovule) and Embryo sac
     The gynoecium represents the female reproductive part of the flower. The
     gynoecium may consist of a single pistil (monocarpellary) or may have
     more than one pistil (multicarpellary). When there are more than one,
     the pistils may be fused together (syncarpous) (Figure 2.7b) or may be
24
     free (apocarpous) (Figure 2.7c). Each pistil has three parts (Figure 2.7a),
     the stigma, style and ovary. The stigma serves as a landing platform
     for pollen grains. The style is the elongated slender part beneath the
     stigma. The basal bulged part of the pistil is the ovary. Inside the ovary
     is the ovarian cavity (locule). The placenta is located inside the ovarian
     cavity. Recall the definition and types of placentation that you studied in
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION




          Stigma



          Style




          Ovary
          Thalamus

    (a)                    (b)              (c)                    (d)


Figure 2.7 (a) A dissected flower of Hibiscus showing pistil (other floral parts have been removed);
           (b) Multicarpellary, syncarpous pistil of Papaver ; (c) A multicarpellary, apocarpous
           gynoecium of Michelia; (d) A diagrammatic view of a typical anatropous ovule


Class XI. Arising from the placenta are the megasporangia, commonly
called ovules. The number of ovules in an ovary may be one (wheat,
paddy, mango) to many (papaya, water melon, orchids).
The Megasporangium (Ovule) : Let us familiarise ourselves with the
structure of a typical angiosperm ovule (Figure 2.7d). The ovule is a small
structure attached to the placenta by means of a stalk called funicle.
The body of the ovule fuses with funicle in the region called hilum. Thus,
hilum represents the junction between ovule and funicle. Each ovule has
one or two protective envelopes called integuments. Integuments encircle
the nucellus except at the tip where a small opening called the micropyle
is organised. Opposite the micropylar end, is the chalaza, representing
the basal part of the ovule.
    Enclosed within the integuments is a mass of cells called the nucellus.
Cells of the nucellus have abundant reserve food materials. Located in the
                                                                                               25
nucellus is the embryo sac or female gametophyte. An ovule generally has
a single embryo sac formed from a megaspore.
Megasporogenesis : The process of formation of megaspores from the
megaspore mother cell is called megasporogenesis. Ovules generally
differentiate a single megaspore mother cell (MMC) in the micropylar region
                                                                                              BIOLOGY




                                           (a)




                     (b)



                                                                         (c)


Figure 2.8   (a) Parts of the ovule showing a large megaspore mother cell, a dyad and a tetrad of
             megaspores; (b) 2, 4, and 8-nucleate stages of embryo sac and a mature embryo sac; (c) A
             diagrammatic representation of the mature embryo sac.




                       of the nucellus. It is a large cell containing dense cytoplasm and a
                       prominent nucleus. The MMC undergoes meiotic division. What is the
                       importance of the MMC undergoing meiosis? Meiosis results in the
                       production of four megaspores (Figure 2.8a).
26
                       Female gametophyte : In a majority of flowering plants, one of the
                       megaspores is functional while the other three degenerate. Only the
                       functional megaspore develops into the female gametophyte (embryo
                       sac). This method of embryo sac formation from a single megaspore is termed
                       monosporic development. What will be the ploidy of the cells of the nucellus,
                       MMC, the functional megaspore and female gametophyte?
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

    Let us study formation of the embryo sac in a little more detail.
(Figure 2.8b). The nucleus of the functional megaspore divides mitotically
to form two nuclei which move to the opposite poles, forming the
2-nucleate embryo sac. Two more sequential mitotic nuclear divisions
result in the formation of the 4-nucleate and later the 8-nucleate stages
of the embryo sac. It is of interest to note that these mitotic divisions are
strictly free nuclear, that is, nuclear divisions are not followed immediately
by cell wall formation. After the 8-nucleate stage, cell walls are laid down
leading to the organisation of the typical female gametophyte
or embryo sac. Observe the distribution of cells inside the embryo sac
(Figure 2.8b, c). Six of the eight nuclei are surrounded by cell walls and
organised into cells; the remaining two nuclei, called polar nuclei are
situated below the egg apparatus in the large central cell.
    There is a characteristic distribution of the cells within the embryo
sac. Three cells are grouped together at the micropylar end and constitute
the egg apparatus. The egg apparatus, in turn, consists of two synergids
and one egg cell. The synergids have special cellular thickenings at the
micropylar tip called filiform apparatus, which play an important role in
guiding the pollen tubes into the synergid. Three cells are at the chalazal
end and are called the antipodals. The large central cell, as mentioned
earlier, has two polar nuclei. Thus, a typical angiosperm embryo sac, at
maturity, though 8-nucleate is 7-celled.

2.2.3 Pollination
In the preceding sections you have learnt that the male and female gametes
in flowering plants are produced in the pollen grain and embryo sac,
respectively. As both types of gametes are non-motile, they have to be
brought together for fertilisation to occur. How is this achieved?
    Pollination is the mechanism to achieve this objective. Transfer
of pollen grains (shed from the anther) to the stigma of a pistil is
termed pollination. Flowering plants have evolved an amazing array
of adaptations to achieve pollination. They make use of external
agents to achieve pollination. Can you list the possible external
agents?
Kinds of Pollination : Depending on the source of pollen, pollination
can be divided into three types.
                                                                                 27
(i)   Autogamy : In this type, pollination is achieved within the same
      flower. Transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the
      same flower (Figure 2.9a). In a normal flower which opens and
      exposes the anthers and the stigma, complete autogamy is rather
      rare. Autogamy in such flowers requires synchrony in pollen release
      and stigma receptivity and also, the anthers and the stigma should
                                                                                            BIOLOGY


                                                   lie close to each other so that self-pollination
                                                   can occur. Some plants such as Viola
                                                   (common pansy), Oxalis, and Commelina
                                                   produce two types of flowers –
                                                   chasmogamous flowers which are similar to
                                                   flowers of other species with exposed anthers
                                                   and stigma, and cleistogamous flowers which
                                                   do not open at all (Figure 2.9c). In such flowers,
                                                   the anthers and stigma lie close to each other.
                   (a)                             When anthers dehisce in the flower buds,
                                                   pollen grains come in contact with the stigma
                                                   to effect pollination. Thus, cleistogamous
                                                   flowers are invariably autogamous as there is
                                                   no chance of cross-pollen landing on the
                                                   stigma. Cleistogamous flowers produce
                                                   assured seed-set even in the absence of
                                                   pollinators. Do you think that cleistogamy is
                                                   advantageous or disadvantageous to the
                                                   plant? Why?
                   (b)                     (ii)    Geitonogamy – Transfer of pollen grains from
                                                   the anther to the stigma of another flower of
                                                   the same plant. Although geitonogamy is
                                                   functionally cross-pollination involving a
                                                   pollinating agent, genetically it is similar to
                                                   autogamy since the pollen grains come from
                                                   the same plant.
                                           (iii)   Xenogamy – Transfer of pollen grains from
                                                   anther to the stigma of a different plant (Figure
                                                   2.9b). This is the only type of pollination which
                                                   during pollination brings genetically different
                                                   types of pollen grains to the stigma.
                                           Agents of Pollination : Plants use two abiotic (wind
                                           and water) and one biotic (animals) agents to achieve
                                           pollination. Majority of plants use biotic agents for
                                           pollination. Only a small proportion of plants use
28                  (c)                    abiotic agents. Pollen grains coming in contact with
                                           the stigma is a chance factor in both wind and water
                                           pollination. To compensate for this uncertainties and
Figure 2.9 (a) Self-pollinated flowers;    associated loss of pollen grains, the flowers produce
           (b) Cross pollinated flowers;   enormous amount of pollen when compared to the
           (c) Cleistogamous flowers
                                           number of ovules available for pollination.
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

     Pollination by wind is more common
amongst abiotic pollinations. Wind pollination
also requires that the pollen grains are light
and non-sticky so that they can be
transported in wind currents. They often
possess well-exposed stamens (so that the
pollens are easily dispersed into wind currents,
Figure 2.10) and large often-feathery stigma
to easily trap air-borne pollen grains. Wind-
pollinated flowers often have a single ovule in
each ovary and numerous flowers packed into
an inflorescence; a familiar example is the corn
cob – the tassels you see are nothing but the
stigma and style which wave in the wind to
trap pollen grains. Wind-pollination is quite
common in grasses.
     Pollination by water is quite rare in
flowering plants and is limited to about 30
genera, mostly monocotyledons. As against
this, you would recall that water is a regular
mode of transport for the male gametes among
the lower plant groups such as algae,
bryophytes and pteridophytes. It is believed,
particularly for some bryophytes and                 Figure 2.10 A wind-pollinated plant showing
                                                                   compact inflorecence and well-
pteridophytes, that their distribution is limited
                                                                   exposed stamens
because of the need for water for the transport
of male gametes and fertilisation. Some
examples of water pollinated plants are Vallisneria and Hydrilla which
grow in fresh water and several marine sea-grasses such as Zostera. Not
all aquatic plants use water for pollination. In a majority of aquatic plants
such as water hyacinth and water lily, the flowers emerge above the level
of water and are pollinated by insects or wind as in most of the land
plants. In Vallisneria, the female flower reach the surface of water by the
long stalk and the male flowers or pollen grains are released on to the
surface of water. They are carried passively by water currents (Figure
2.11a); some of them eventually reach the female flowers and the stigma.
In another group of water pollinated plants such as seagrasses, female
flowers remain submerged in water and the pollen grains are released
inside the water. Pollen grains in many such species are long, ribbon like
                                                                                             29
and they are carried passively inside the water; some of them reach the
stigma and achieve pollination. In most of the water-pollinated species,
pollen grains are protected from wetting by a mucilaginous covering.
     Both wind and water pollinated flowers are not very colourful and do
not produce nectar. What would be the reason for this?
                                                                                               BIOLOGY


                                                                     Majority of flowering plants use
                                                                 a range of animals as pollinating
                                                                 agents. Bees, butterflies, flies,
                                                                 beetles, wasps, ants, moths, birds
                                                                 (sunbirds and humming birds) and
                                                                 bats are the common pollinating
                                                                 agents. (Figure 2.11b). Among the
                                                                 animals, insects, particularly bees
                                                                 are the dominant biotic pollinating
                                                                 agents. Even larger animals such
                                                                 as some primates (lemurs), arboreal
                                                                 (tree-dwelling) rodents, or even
                                                                 reptiles (gecko lizard and garden
                                                                 lizard) have also been reported as
                                                                 pollinators in some species.
                                                                     Often flowers of animal-
                               (a)
                                                                 pollinated plants are specifically
                                                                 adapted for a particular species of
                                                                 animal.
                                                                     Majority of insect-pollinated
                                                                 flowers are large, colourful, fragrant
                                                                 and rich in nectar. When the flowers
                                                                 are small, a number of flowers are
                                                                 clustered into an inflorescence to
                                                                 make them conspicuous. Animals
                                                                 are attracted to flowers by colour
                                                                 and/or fragrance. The flowers
                                                                 pollinated by flies and beetles
                                                                 secrete foul odours to attract these
                                                                 animals. To sustain animal visits,
                                                                 the flowers have to provide rewards
                                                                 to the animals. Nectar and pollen
                                                                 grains are the usual floral rewards.
                                                                 For harvesting the reward(s) from
                          (b)
                                                                 the flower the animal visitor comes
Figure 2.11 (a) Pollination by water in Vallisneria ;            in contact with the anthers and the
            (b) Insect pollination                               stigma. The body of the animal gets
                                                                 a coating of pollen grains, which are
30                      generally   sticky in animal  pollinated flowers. When the animal carrying
                        pollen on its body comes in contact with the stigma, it brings about
                        pollination.
                              In some species floral rewards are in providing safe places to lay eggs;
                        an example is that of the tallest flower of Amorphophallus (the flower
                        itself is about 6 feet in height). A similar relationship exists between a
                        species of moth and the plant Yucca where both species – moth and the
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

plant – cannot complete their life cycles without each other. The moth
deposits its eggs in the locule of the ovary and the flower, in turn, gets
pollinated by the moth. The larvae of the moth come out of the eggs as
the seeds start developing.
    Why don’t you observe some flowers of the following plants (or any
others available to you): Cucumber, Mango, Peepal, Coriander, Papaya,
Onion, Lobia, Cotton, Tobacco, Rose, Lemon, Eucalyptus, Banana? Try to
find out which animals visit them and whether they could be
pollinators.You’ll have to patiently observe the flowers over a few days
and at different times of the day. You could also try to see whether there
is any correlation in the characteristics of a flower to the animal that
visits it. Carefully observe if any of the visitors come in contact with the
anthers and the stigma as only such visitors can bring about pollination.
Many insects may consume pollen or the nectar without bringing about
pollination. Such floral visitors are referred to as pollen/nectar robbers.
You may or may not be able to identify the pollinators, but you will surely
enjoy your efforts!

Outbreeding Devices : Majority of flowering plants produce hermaphrodite
flowers and pollen grains are likely to come in contact with the stigma of
the same flower. Continued self-pollination result in inbreeding depression.
Flowering plants have developed many devices to discourage self-
pollination and to encourage cross-pollination. In some species, pollen
release and stigma receptivity are not synchronised. Either the pollen is
released before the stigma becomes receptive or stigma becomes receptive
much before the release of pollen. In some other species, the anther and
stigma are placed at different positions so that the pollen cannot come in
contact with the stigma of the same flower. Both these devices prevent
autogamy. The third device to prevent inbreeding is self-incompatibility.
This is a genetic mechanism and prevents self-pollen (from the same flower
or other flowers of the same plant) from fertilising the ovules by inhibiting
pollen germination or pollen tube growth in the pistil. Another device to
prevent self-pollination is the production of unisexual flowers. If both male
and female flowers are present on the same plant such as castor and maize
(monoecious), it prevents autogamy but not geitonogamy. In several species
such as papaya, male and female flowers are present on different plants,
that is each plant is either male or female (dioecy). This condition prevents
both autogamy and geitonogamy.

Pollen-pistil Interaction : Pollination does not guarantee the transfer           31
of the right type of pollen (compatible pollen of the same species as the
stigma). Often, pollen of the wrong type, either from other species or from
the same plant (if it is self-incompatible), also land on the stigma. The
pistil has the ability to recognise the pollen, whether it is of the right type
(compatible) or of the wrong type (incompatible). If it is of the right type,
the pistil accepts the pollen and promotes post-pollination events that
                                                                                                    BIOLOGY




              (a)                                    (b)                                 (c)




                                              (d)                                         (e)

Figure 2.12         (a) Pollen grains germinating on the stigma; (b) Pollen tubes growing through the
                    style; (c) L.S. of pistil showing path of pollen tube growth; (d) enlarged view of an
                    egg apparatus showing entry of pollen tube into a synergid; (e) Discharge of male
                    gametes into a synergid and the movements of the sperms, one into the egg and
                    the other into the central cell


                           leads to fertilisation. If the pollen is of the wrong type, the pistil rejects the
                           pollen by preventing pollen germination on the stigma or the pollen tube
                           growth in the style. The ability of the pistil to recognise the pollen followed
                           by its acceptance or rejection is the result of a continuous dialogue
                           between pollen grain and the pistil. This dialogue is mediated by chemical
32                         components of the pollen interacting with those of the pistil. It is only in
                           recent years that botanists have been able to identify some of the pollen
                           and pistil components and the interactions leading to the recognition,
                           followed by acceptance or rejection.
                               As mentioned earlier, following compatible pollination, the pollen grain
                           germinates on the stigma to produce a pollen tube through one of the
                           germ pores (Figure 2.12a). The contents of the pollen grain move into the
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

pollen tube. Pollen tube grows through the tissues of the stigma and
style and reaches the ovary (Figure 2.12b, c). You would recall that in
some plants, pollen grains are shed at two-celled condition (a vegetative
cell and a generative cell). In such plants, the generative cell divides and
forms the two male gametes during the growth of pollen tube in the stigma.
In plants which shed pollen in the three-celled condition, pollen tubes
carry the two male gametes from the beginning. Pollen tube, after reaching
the ovary, enters the ovule through the micropyle and then enters one of
the synergids through the filiform apparatus (Figure 2.12d, e). Many recent
studies have shown that filiform apparatus present at the micropylar part
of the synergids guides the entry of pollen tube. All these events–from
pollen deposition on the stigma until pollen tubes enter the ovule–are
together referred to as pollen-pistil interaction. As pointed out earlier,
pollen-pistil interaction is a dynamic process involving pollen recognition
followed by promotion or inhibition of the pollen. The knowledge gained
in this area would help the plant breeder in manipulating pollen-pistil
interaction, even in incompatible pollinations, to get desired hybrids.
    You can easily study pollen germination by dusting some pollen from
flowers such as pea, chickpea, Crotalaria, balsam and Vinca on a glass slide
containing a drop of sugar solution (about 10 per cent). After about 15–30
minutes, observe the slide under the low power lens of the microscope. You
are likely to see pollen tubes coming out of the pollen grains.
    As you shall learn in the chapter on plant breeding (Chapter 9), a
breeder is interested in crossing different species and often genera to
combine desirable characters to produce commercially ‘superior’ varieties.
Artificial hybridisation is one of the major approaches of crop
improvement programme. In such crossing experiments it is important
to make sure that only the desired pollen grains are used for pollination
and the stigma is protected from contamination (from unwanted pollen).
This is achieved by emasculation and bagging techniques.
    If the female parent bears bisexual flowers, removal of anthers from
the flower bud before the anther dehisces using a pair of forceps is
necessary. This step is referred to as emasculation. Emasculated flowers
have to be covered with a bag of suitable size, generally made up of butter
paper, to prevent contamination of its stigma with unwanted pollen. This
process is called bagging. When the stigma of bagged flower attains
receptivity, mature pollen grains collected from anthers of the male parent
are dusted on the stigma, and the flowers are rebagged, and the fruits         33
allowed to develop.
    If the female parent produces unisexual flowers, there is no need for
emasculation. The female flower buds are bagged before the flowers open.
When the stigma becomes receptive, pollination is carried out using the
desired pollen and the flower rebagged.
                                                                                           BIOLOGY


                       2.3 DOUBLE FERTILISATION
                       After entering one of the synergids, the pollen tube releases the two male
                       gametes into the cytoplasm of the synergid. One of the male gametes
                       moves towards the egg cell and fuses with its nucleus thus completing the
                       syngamy. This results in the formation of a diploid cell, the zygote. The
                       other male gamete moves towards the two polar nuclei located in the central
                       cell and fuses with them to produce a triploid primary endosperm nucleus
                       (PEN) (Figure 2.13a). As this involves the fusion of three haploid nuclei it
                       is termed triple fusion. Since two types of fusions, syngamy and triple
                       fusion take place in an embryo sac the phenomenon is termed double
                       fertilisation, an event unique to flowering plants. The central cell after
                       triple fusion becomes the primary endosperm cell (PEC) and develops
                       into the endosperm while the zygote develops into an embryo.




                             (a)                                               (b)


Figure 2.13 (a) Fertilised embryo sac showing zygote and Primary Endosperm Nucleus (PEN);
            (b) Stages in embryo development in a dicot [shown in reduced size as compared to (a)]



                       2.4 POST-FERTILISATION : STRUCTURES               AND   EVENTS
                       Following double fertilisation, events of endosperm and embryo
34                     development, maturation of ovule(s) into seed(s) and ovary into fruit, are
                       collectively termed post-fertilisation events.

                       2.4.1 Endosperm
                       Endosperm development precedes embryo development. Why? The
                       primary endosperm cell divides repeatedly and forms a triploid
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

endosperm tissue. The cells of this tissue are filled with
reserve food materials and are used for the nutrition of
the developing embryo. In the most common type of
endosperm development, the PEN undergoes successive
nuclear divisions to give rise to free nuclei. This stage of
endosperm development is called free-nuclear endosperm.
Subsequently cell wall formation occurs and the
endosperm becomes cellular. The number of free nuclei
formed before cellularisation varies greatly. The coconut
water from tender coconut that you are familiar with, is
nothing but free-nuclear endosperm (made up of
thousands of nuclei) and the surrounding white kernel is
the cellular endosperm.
   Endosperm may either be completely consumed by the                     (a)
developing embryo (e.g., pea, groundnut, beans) before seed
maturation or it may persist in the mature seed (e.g. castor
and coconut) and be used up during seed germination. Split
open some seeds of castor, peas, beans, groundnut, fruit of
coconut and look for the endosperm in each case. Find out
whether the endosperm is persistent in cereals – wheat, rice
and maize.

2.4.2 Embryo
Embryo develops at the micropylar end of the embryo sac where
the zygote is situated. Most zygotes divide only after certain
amount of endosperm is formed. This is an adaptation to
provide assured nutrition to the developing embryo. Though
the seeds differ greatly, the early stages of embryo development
(embryogeny) are similar in both monocotyledons and
dicotyledons. Figure 2.13 depicts the stages of embryogeny in
a dicotyledonous embryo. The zygote gives rise to the
proembryo and subsequently to the globular, heart-shaped
and mature embryo.
                                                                      (b)
    A typical dicotyledonous embryo (Figure 2.14a), consists
of an embryonal axis and two cotyledons. The portion of Figure 2.14 (a) A typical dicot
embryonal axis above the level of cotyledons is the epicotyl,       embryo; (b) L.S. of an
                                                                    embryo of grass
which terminates with the plumule or stem tip. The cylindrical
portion below the level of cotyledons is hypocotyl that
terminates at its lower end in the radicle or root tip. The root                     35
tip is covered with a root cap.
    Embryos of monocotyledons (Figure 2.14 b) possess only
one cotyledon. In the grass family the cotyledon is called
scutellum that is situated towards one side (lateral) of the
embryonal axis. At its lower end, the embryonal axis has the
                                                                            BIOLOGY


     radical and root cap enclosed in an undifferentiated sheath called
     coleorrhiza. The portion of the embryonal axis above the level of
     attachment of scutellum is the epicotyl. Epicotyl has a shoot apex and a
     few leaf primordia enclosed in a hollow foliar structure, the coleoptile.
         Soak a few seeds in water (say of wheat, maize, peas, chickpeas,
     ground nut) overnight. Then split the seeds and observe the various
     parts of the embryo and the seed.

     2.4.3 Seed
     In angiosperms, the seed is the final product of sexual reproduction. It is
     often described as a fertilised ovule. Seeds are formed inside fruits. A
     seed typically consists of seed coat(s), cotyledon(s) and an embryo axis.
     The cotyledons (Figure 2.15a) of the embryo are simple structures,
     generally thick and swollen due to storage of food reserves (as in legumes).
     Mature seeds may be non-albuminous or ex-albuminous. Non-
     albuminous seeds have no residual endosperm as it is completely
     consumed during embryo development (e.g., pea, groundnut).
     Albuminous seeds retain a part of endosperm as it is not completely used
     up during embryo development (e.g., wheat, maize, barley, castor).
     Occasionally, in some seeds such as black pepper and beet, remnants of
     nucellus are also persistent. This residual, persistent nucellus is the
     perisperm.
         Integuments of ovules harden as tough protective seed coats
     (Figure 2.15a). The micropyle remains as a small pore in the seed coat.
     This facilitates entry of oxygen and water into the seed during germination.
     As the seed matures, its water content is reduced and seeds become
     relatively dry (10-15 per cent moisture by mass). The general metabolic
     activity of the embryo slows down. The embryo may enter a state of
     inactivity called dormancy, or if favourable conditions are available
     (adequate moisture, oxygen and suitable temperature), they germinate.
         As ovules mature into seeds, the ovary develops into a fruit, i.e., the
     transformation of ovules into seeds and ovary into fruit proceeds
     simultaneously. The wall of the ovary develops into the wall of fruit called
     pericarp. The fruits may be fleshy as in guava, orange, mango, etc., or
     may be dry, as in groundnut, and mustard, etc. Many fruits have evolved
     mechanisms for dispersal of seeds. Recall the classification of fruits and
     their dispersal mechanisms that you have studied in an earlier class. Is
     there any relationship between number of ovules in an ovary and the
36   number of seeds present in a fruit?
         In most plants, by the time the fruit develops from the ovary, other
     floral parts degenerate and fall off. However, in a few species such as apple,
     strawberry, cashew, etc., the thalamus also contributes to fruit formation.
     Such fruits are called false fruits (Figure 2.15b). Most fruits however
     develop only from the ovary and are called true fruits. Although in most
     of the species, fruits are the results of fertilisation, there are a few species
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION




                                                 (a)




                                                  (b)

         Figure 2.15 (a) Structure of some seeds. (b) False fruits of apple and strawberry


in which fruits develop without fertilisation. Such fruits are called
parthenocarpic fruits. Banana is one such example. Parthenocarpy can
be induced through the application of growth hormones and such fruits
                                                                                             37
are seedless.
    Seeds offer several advantages to angiosperms. Firstly, since
reproductive processes such as pollination and fertilisation are
independent of water, seed formation is more dependable. Also seeds have
better adaptive strategies for dispersal to new habitats and help the species
                                                                          BIOLOGY


     to colonise in other areas. As they have sufficient food reserves, young
     seedlings are nourished until they are capable of photosynthesis on their
     own. The hard seed coat provides protection to the young embryo. Being
     products of sexual reproduction, they generate new genetic combinations
     leading to variations.
         Seed is the basis of our agriculture. Dehydration and dormancy of
     mature seeds are crucial for storage of seeds which can be used as food
     throughout the year and also to raise crop in the next season. Can you
     imagine agriculture in the absence of seeds, or in the presence of seeds
     which germinate straight away soon after formation and cannot be stored?
         How long do the seeds remain alive after they are dispersed? This
     period again varies greatly. In a few species the seeds lose viability within
     a few months. Seeds of a large number of species live for several years.
     Some seeds can remain alive for hundreds of years. There are several
     records of very old yet viable seeds. The oldest is that of a lupine, Lupinus
     arcticus excavated from Arctic Tundra. The seed germinated and flowered
     after an estimated record of 10,000 years of dormancy. A recent record of
     2000 years old viable seed is of the date palm, Phoenix dactylifera
     discovered during the archeological excavation at King Herod’s palace
     near the Dead Sea.
         After completing a brief account of sexual reproduction of flowering
     plants it would be worth attempting to comprehend the enormous
     reproductive capacity of some flowering plants by asking the following
     questions: How many eggs are present in an embryo sac? How many
     embryo sacs are present in an ovule? How many ovules are present in
     an ovary? How many ovaries are present in a typical flower? How many
     flowers are present on a tree? And so on...
         Can you think of some plants in which fruits contain very large
     number of seeds. Orchid fruits are one such category and each fruit
     contain thousands of tiny seeds. Similar is the case in fruits of some
     parasitic species such as Orobanche and Striga. Have you seen a tiny
     seed of Ficus? How large is the tree of Ficus developed from that tiny
     seed. How many billions of seeds does each Ficus tree produce? Can
     you imagine any other example in which such a tiny structure can
     produce such a large biomass over the years?

     2.5 APOMIXIS       AND   POLYEMBRYONY
     Although seeds, in general are the products of fertilisation, a few flowering
38   plants such as some species of Asteraceae and grasses, have evolved a
     special mechanism, to produce seeds without fertilisation, called apomixis.
     What is fruit production without fertilisation called? Thus, apomixis is a
     form of asexual reproduction that mimics sexual reproduction. There are
     several ways of development of apomictic seeds. In some species, the
     diploid egg cell is formed without reduction division and develops into
     the embryo without fertilisation. More often, as in many Citrus and Mango
     varieties some of the nucellar cells surrounding the embryo sac start
     dividing, protrude into the embryo sac and develop into the embryos. In
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

such species each ovule contains many embryos. Occurrence of more
than one embryo in a seed is referred to as polyembryony. Take out
some seeds of orange and squeeze them. Observe the many embryos of
different sizes and shapes from each seed. Count the number of embryos
in each seed. What would be the genetic nature of apomictic embryos?
Can they be called clones?
    Hybrid varieties of several of our food and vegetable crops are being
extensively cultivated. Cultivation of hybrids has tremendously increased
productivity. One of the problems of hybrids is that hybrid seeds have
to be produced every year. If the seeds collected from hybrids are sown,
the plants in the progeny will segregate and do not maintain hybrid
characters. Production of hybrid seeds is costly and hence the cost of
hybrid seeds become too expensive for the farmers. If these hybrids are
made into apomicts, there is no segregation of characters in the hybrid
progeny. Then the farmers can keep on using the hybrid seeds to raise
new crop year after year and he does not have to buy hybrid seeds every
year. Because of the importance of apomixis in hybrid seed industry,
active research is going on in many laboratories around the world to
understand the genetics of apomixis and to transfer apomictic genes
into hybrid varieties.




                                SUMMARY
  Flowers are the seat of sexual reproduction in angiosperms. In the flower,
  androecium consisting of stamens represents the male reproductive
  organs and gynoecium consisting of pistils represents the female
  reproductive organs.
      A typical anther is bilobed, dithecous and tetrasporangiate. Pollen
  grains develop inside the microsporangia. Four wall layers, the
  epidermis, endothecium, middle layers and the tapetum surround the
  microsporangium. Cells of the sporogenous tissue lying in the centre of
  the microsporangium, undergo meiosis (microsporogenesis) to form
  tetrads of microspores. Individual microspores mature into pollen grains.
      Pollen grains represents the male gametophytic generation. The
  pollen grains have a two-layered wall, the outer exine and inner intine.
  The exine is made up of sporopollenin and has germ pores. Pollen grains
  may have two cells (a vegetative cell and generative cell) or three cells (a
  vegetative cell and two male gametes) at the time of shedding.
      The pistil has three parts – the stigma, style and the ovary. Ovules
  are present in the ovary. The ovules have a stalk called funicle, protective
                                                                                 39
  integument(s), and an opening called micropyle. The central tissue is
  the nucellus in which the archesporium differentiates. A cell of the
  archesporium, the megaspore mother cell divides meiotically and one of
  the megaspores forms the embryo sac (the female gametophyte). The
  mature embryo sac is 7-celled and 8-nucleate. At the micropylar end is
                                                                             BIOLOGY



      the egg apparatus consisting of two synergids and an egg cell. At the
      chalazal end are three antipodals. At the centre is a large central cell
      with two polar nuclei.
          Pollination is the mechanism to transfer pollen grains from the
      anther to the stigma. Pollinating agents are either abiotic (wind and
      water) or biotic (animals).
          Pollen-pistil interaction involves all events from the landing of pollen
      grains on the stigma until the pollen tube enters the embryo sac (when
      the pollen is compatible) or pollen inhibition (when the pollen is
      incompatible). Following compatible pollination, pollen grain germinates
      on the stigma and the resulting pollen tube grow through the style,
      enter the ovules and finally discharges two male gametes in one of the
      synergids. Angiosperms exhibit double fertilisation because two fusion
      events occur in each embryo sac, namely syngamy and triple fusion.
      The products of these fusions are the diploid zygote and the triploid
      primary endosperm nucleus (in the primary endosperm cell). Zygote
      develops into the embryo and the primary endosperm cell forms the
      endosperm tissue. Formation of endosperm always precedes
      development of the embryo.
          The developing embryo passes through different stages such as
      the proembryo, globular and heart-shaped stages before maturation.
      Mature dicotyledonous embryo has two cotyledons and an embryonal
      axis with epicotyl and hypocotyl. Embryos of monocotyledons have a
      single cotyledon. After fertilisation, ovary develops into fruit and ovules
      develop into seeds.
          A phenomenon called apomixis is found in some angiosperms,
      particularly in grasses. It results in the formation of seeds without
      fertilisation. Apomicts have several advantages in horticulture and
      agriculture.
          Some angiosperms produce more than one embryo in their seed.
      This phenomenon is called polyembryony.




                            EXERCISES
     1.   Name the parts of an angiosperm flower in which development of male
          and female gametophyte take place.
     2.   Differentiate between microsporogenesis and megasporogenesis. Which
          type of cell division occurs during these events? Name the structures
          formed at the end of these two events.
     3.   Arrange the following terms in the correct developmental sequence:
40        Pollen grain, sporogenous tissue, microspore tetrad, pollen mother cell,
          male gametes.
     4.   With a neat, labelled diagram, describe the parts of a typical angiosperm
          ovule.
     5.   What is meant by monosporic development of female gametophyte?
     6.   With a neat diagram explain the 7-celled, 8-nucleate nature of the female
          gametophyte.
SEXUAL
HUMANREPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS
       REPRODUCTION

 7.   What are chasmogamous flowers? Can cross-pollination occur in
      cleistogamous flowers? Give reasons for your answer.
 8.   Mention two strategies evolved to prevent self-pollination in flowers.
 9.   What is self-incompatibility? Why does self-pollination not lead to seed
      formation in self-incompatible species?
10. What is bagging technique?          How is it useful in a plant breeding
    programme?
11. What is triple fusion? Where and how does it take place? Name the
    nuclei involved in triple fusion.
12. Why do you think the zygote is dormant for sometime in a fertilised
    ovule?
13. Differentiate between:
      (a) hypocotyl and epicotyl;
      (b) coleoptile and coleorrhiza;
      (c) integument and testa;
      (d) perisperm and pericarp.
14. Why is apple called a false fruit? Which part(s) of the flower forms the
    fruit?
15. What is meant by emasculation? When and why does a plant breeder
    employ this technique?
16. If one can induce parthenocarpy through the application of growth
    substances, which fruits would you select to induce parthenocarpy
    and why?
17. Explain the role of tapetum in the formation of pollen-grain wall.
18. What is apomixis and what is its importance?




                                                                                 41
